210 ACANTHACEAE

giosperms are a monophyletic group (Hamby & Zimmer 1992; Chase et al. 1993; Doyle et al.
1994) and that among living plants the Gnetophyta are the sister group of the angiosperms. In
other words, the Gnetophyta are more closely related to the angiosperms than to any other liv-
ing gymnosperm group (Chase et al. 1993; Doyle et al. 1994); however, this does not necessarily
mean that the Gnetophyta is the gymnosperm group that gave rise to the angiosperms. While
there is general concensus that the angiosperms evolved from gymnosperms, the exact gymno-
sperm group is as yet unknown with certainty.

The historical division of flowering plants into Class Monocotyledonae (monocots) and Class
Dicotyledonae (dicots) is not supported by molecular data. Rather, the monocots appear to be a
well-supported monophyletic group derived from within the Magnoliidae group of dicots
(Chase et al. 1993; Duvall et al. 1993; Qiu et al. 1993). The dicots are therefore paraphyletic and
thus, from the cladistic stand point, inappropriate for formal recognition (see explantion and
Fig. 41 in Appendix 6). However, for practical reasons we are continuing to recognize these two
traditional classes. The monocots are listed after the dicots to indicate their derivation from
within the dicots.
REFERENCES: Cronquist 1981, 1988, 1993; Hamby & Zimmer 1992; Thorne 1992; Chase et al. 1993;
Duvall et al. 1993; Qiu et al. 1993; Reveal 1993a, 1993b; Doyle et al. 1994; Takhtajan 1997.


                           CLASS DICOTYLEDONAE
Plants herbaceous or woody, often with secondary tissues derived from a vascular cambium;
seedlings usually with 2 seed leaves or cotyledons; stems or branches elongating by apical
growth; leaves not elongating when once expanded; new leaves and branches developing from
terminal or axillary buds; leaves when present alternate, opposite, whorled, or basal, com-
monly with a petiole and expanded blade; leaf blades usually net-veined, with midrib and less
prominent, spreading branch-veins (these sometimes nearly parallel in very narrow leaves),
but veins sometimes buried in thick or fleshy leaves; perianth herbaceous, with dissimilar in-
ner and outer whorls (= petals and sepals), or all parts about alike (= tepals), the perianth parts
separate or united, commonly in 2s or 5s or numerous, occasionally in 3s or perianth absent.
AWorldwide, the Dicotyledonae is a group composed of ca. 193,700 species in 10,534 genera
divided into 321 families (Mabberley 1997); 124 of these families occur in nc TX. Based on mo-
lecular analyses (Chase et al. 1993), the dicots are a paraphyletic group with the monocots de-
rived from within the dicot subclass Magnoliidae (see explanation and Fig. 41 in Appendix 6).
From a cladistic standpoint, the dicots are thus not appropriately recognized in a formal taxo-
nomic sense. One traditional dicot family, Ceratophyllaceae, is apparently the sister taxon to,
and highly divergent from, all the rest of the flowering plants. The major division within the
remaining flowering plants (excluding Ceratophyllaceae) is not between monocots and dicots,
but rather between two groups corresponding to the two major angiosperm pollen types:
uniaperturate and triaperturate. The uniaperturate (= 1-pored) group includes the “woody
magnoliids” (e.g., Magnoliales, Laurales), the “paleoherbs” (e.g., Aristochiales, Piperales, and
Nymphaeales), and the monocots. The triaperturate (= 3-pored) group includes all remaining
dicots (Chase et al. 1993). This triaperturate group is referred to as the “eudicots” and appears to
be monophyletic (Raven et al. 1999).
REFERENCES: Cronquist 1981, 1988, 1993; Downie & Palmer 1992; Hufford 1992; Olmstead et al.
1992; Thorne 1992; Wagenitz 1992; Chase et al. 1993; Kubitzki et al. 1993; Qiu et al. 1993; Reveal
1993a, 1993b; Takhtajan 1997; Raven et al. 1999.


  ACANTHACEAE ACANTHUS OR WILD PETUNIA FAMILY
Ours perennial herbs (some woody basally and 1 shrub) often with squarish stems; foliage of-
                                                                                                    ACANTHACEAE 211

ten with minute cystoliths (= mineral concretions) on surface; leaves opposite, sessile to peti-
oled, simple; leaf blades entire or indistinctly toothed; stipules absent; flowers axillary or
terminal, solitary or in peduncled spikes, cymes, or panicles; sepals 5, lanceolate or linear-lan-
ceolate, united at base or up to 1/3 their length; corollas 2-lipped, or nearly radially symmetri-
cal and 4-to 5-lobed, often with a color pattern; stamens 2 or 4; pistil 1; pistil of 2 carpels; ovary
superior; style 1; fruit a capsule usually with 2 or 4 seeds; each seed typically supported by a
small hook-like outgrowth (called a retinaculum or a jaculator)
AA large (3,450 species in 229 genera), cosmopolitan, but mainly tropical family of mostly
shrubs with some herbs, twiners, trees, and even aquatics; a number are used ornamentally in-
cluding Acanthus, Justicia brandegeeana Wassh. & L.B. Sm. (SHRIMP-PLANT), and Thunbergia
(CLOCKVINE). The family is closely allied to the Scrophulariaceae and some genera are interme-
diate between the two. Family name from Acanthus, BEAR’S-BREECHES, a genus of 30 mostly
spiny xerophytic species of Old World tropical and warm areas; the leaf motif in the capitals of
Corinthian columns supposedly originated from A. spinosusL. (Greek: acanthos, thorn, in refer-
ence to the spiny leaves and bracts) (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs (and 1 shrub) with opposite, simple, entire or indis-
tinctly toothed leaves; flowers with sympetalous, 2-lipped or sometimes nearly radially symmetri-
cal flowers in often bracteate inflorescences; stamens 2 or 4; fruit a capsule with seeds on small
hook-like structures. In the somewhat similar Lamiaceae the fruits are of 4 one-seeded nutlets.
REFERENCES: Wasshausen 1966; Long 1970; Daniel 1984.

1. Plant a trailing or climbing vine; corollas yellow to orange, cream, or white, with a conspicuous
   dark purple center; seeds not supported by a small hook-like retinaculum                                    Thunbergia
1. Plant not a vine, either a ± erect herb or small shrub; corollas various, but not as above; seeds
   each supported by a small hook-like retinaculum.
   2. Corollas not deeply 2-lipped, nearly radially symmetrical to slightly bilabiate, the lobes ± equal;
      stamens 4 (except 2 in the rare Carlowrightia).
      3. Corollas 15–65 mm long, lavender to bluish purple or white, with 5 lobes; stamens 4; wide-
         spread in nc TX.
         4. Calyces about 3/4 as long as corollas; anther sacs basally awned or mucronate; leaf blades
            linear to oblanceolate; corolla tube 7 mm or less long                                             Dyschoristee
         4. Calyces less than half as long as corollas; anther sacs basally rounded; leaf blades usually
            much broader than linear to oblanceolate; corolla tube usually much > 7 mm long                         Ruellia
      3. Corollas 6–7 mm long, white with maroon nerves on lobes, with 4 lobes; stamens 2; rare in
         nc TX                                                                                               Carlowrightia
   2. Corollas deeply 2-lipped and/or lobes clearly unequal; stamens 2.
      5. Corollas reddish, 30–40 mm long; plants definitely woody, small shrubs                              Anisacanthus
      5. Corollas white to violet, lavender, purple, rose, or flesh-colored, sometimes with darker dots,
         10–28 mm long; plants herbaceous or woody only at base.
         6. Calyces 4-lobed; corolla tube long, slender, and cylindric, very conspicuous, longer than
            the corolla lobes; plants woody at base; plants of upland habitats; in w part of nc TX
                                                                                                            Siphonoglossa
         6. Calyces 5-lobed; corolla tube inconspicuous, ca. as long as corolla lobes or shorter; plants
            not woody at base; plants of wet or moist areas; widespread in nc TX.
            7. Leaves usually long-petioled (petioles (0.5–)2–7 cm or more long); flowers in small clus-
               ters, subtended and covered by 2 to 4 obovate bracts; peduncles < 4 cm long, usu-
               ally shorter than or equal to the petioles of subtending leaves; corollas with lower lip
               unlobed                                                                                           Dicliptera
                                                                                                                          a
            7. Leaves usually sessile or with shorter petioles; flowers in a slender, 1-sided spike or in a
               dense head-like spike, subtended by small, linear to subulate bracts; peduncles elon-
212 ACANTHACEAE/ANISACANTHUS

          gate, usually > 4 cm long, much longer than the petioles of subtending leaves; corollas
          with lower lip 3-lobed                                                                    Justicia


                               ANISACANTHUS ANISACANTH
AA genus of 8 species native to the sw United States and Mexico; some are cultivated as orna-
mentals. (Greek: anisa, unequal, and Acanthus, from akanthos, a thorn)
REFERENCES: Hagen 1941; Henrickson 1986.

Anisacanthus quadrifidus (Vahl) Nees var. wrightii (Torr.) Henr., (sp.: four-cut; var.: for Charles
Wright, 1811–1885, TX collector), WRIGHT’S ANISACANTHUS, HUMMINGBIRD-BUSH, FLAME-ACAN-
THUS. Shrub to ca. 1.5 m tall; leaf blades to 5 cm long and 2 cm wide; petioles to 1 cm long; flow-
ers single or in pairs in terminal, 1-sided, spike-like inflorescences; calyces ca. 5 mm long; corol-
las reddish, 3–4 cm long, 2-lipped, the upper lip entire or nearly so, the lower lip 3-lobed; corolla
tube longer than lobes, ± straight, slender, scarcely dilated at throat; stamens 2; capsules ca. 15
mm long; seeds 2(–4). Used in landscapes and escapes; adventive in Dallas Co. but not well-es-
tablished (E. McWilliams, pers. comm.); native to Edwards Plateau. Jun–Aug. [A. wrightii (Torr.)
A. Gray]

                                         CARLOWRIGHTIA
AA genus of 23 species of warm to arid areas from the sw U.S. to Costa Rica. (Named for
Charles Wright, 1811–1885, botanical collector mainly in TX, Cuba, and his native Connecticut;
correspondent of Asa Gray)
REFERENCES: Henrickson & Daniel 1979; Daniel 1980, 1983.

Carlowrightia texana Henr. & T.F. Daniel, (of Texas), TEXAS CARLOWRIGHTIA. Strigulose perennial
(5–)10–30 cm tall from a much branched twiggy base; leaves petiolate; leaf blades (2.5–)6–16(–
42) mm long, oblong-ovate, broadly ovate to orbicular, entire; flowers 1–3 in middle and upper
leaf axils or occasionally in terminal spike-like inflorescences with reduced leaves/bracts; ca-
lyces 3–5 mm long; corollas 6–7 mm long, white with maroon nerves on lobes; capsules 7.5–11
mm long, glabrous, 4-seeded. Rocky slopes, often disturbed areas; described as a new species by
Henrickson and Daniel in 1979; their distribution map showed 2 nc TX localities (no counties
given); Daniel (1983) cited Callahan and Tarrant cos.; mainly s TX w across Edwards Plateau to
Trans-Pecos. Apr–Nov.

                                              DICLIPTERA
AA genus of ca. 150 species of tropical and warm areas; some are cultivated as ornamentals.
(Greek: diklis, double-folded, as of doors, etc., and pteron, a wing, alluding either to the 2-winged
fruit or possibly the involucre)

Dicliptera brachiata (Pursh) Spreng., (branched at right angles), FALSE MINT. Perennial herb to
0.7(–1) m tall; leaf blades to 12(–15) cm long, (1.5–)2–7 cm wide; petioles (0.5–)2–7 cm or more
long; flowers in axillary, short-peduncled to subsessile clusters, the clusters subtended by an
involucre of 2–4 floral bracts; floral bracts obovate, to 7 mm long, 2–5 mm wide; corollas pur-
plish or pinkish (rarely white), 15–20 mm long including tube, the upper lip entire or shallowly
2-lobed, the lower lip usually entire; capsules ovoid, 5–6 mm long, stipitate, emarginate apically,
with 2–4 seeds. Moist wooded stream bottoms, wet habitats; se and e TX w to East Cross Tim-
bers. Jun–Nov. m/87

                                             DYSCHORISTE
AA genus of ca. 65 tropical and warm area species. (Greek: dys, hard, and chorist, separate or
asunder, referring to the coherent, hard to separate capsule valves)
                                                                                     JUSTICIA /ACANTHACEAE 213

REFERENCE: Kobuski 1928.

Dyschoriste linearis (Torr. & A. Gray) Kuntze, (linear, narrow with sides nearly parallel), NAR-
ROW-LEAF SNAKEHERB, NARROW-LEAF DYSCHORISTE, SNAKEHERB. Rhizomatous, ± pubescent her-
baceous perennial; stems erect or partly decumbent, usually 7–30 cm long; leaves sessile, linear
to oblanceolate, obtuse; flowers axillary, sessile, shorter than the leaves, with foliaceous bracts;
sepals long acuminate, united about 1/4, the lobes 9–13 mm long; corollas lavender, with dark
dots in throat, 15–27 mm long; capsules with 2–4 seeds. Rocky or sandy ground; throughout
most of TX, especially w 2/3. Apr–Jul, sporadically to Oct. m/88

                                     JUSTICIA WATER-WILLOW
Ours perennial herbs; leaves simple, entire; flowers in axillary pedunculate heads or spikes; ca-
lyx lobes 5; corollas 2-lipped, the lower lip 3-lobed; stamens 2; capsules 4-seeded, the 2 valves
reflexed at maturity.
AA genus of ca. 600 species of herbs and shrubs of tropical and warm areas of the world and
temperate North America; some such as J. brandegeeana Wassh. & L.B. Sm., SHRIMP-PLANT, (for-
merly treated in Beloperone), are cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for James Justice, 18th cen-
tury Scottish botanist)

1. Flowers closely crowded in dense head-like spikes that become oblong at maturity; lower lip of
   corolla arched-recurving; widespread throughout nc TX                                              J. americana
1. Flowers in loosely-flowered, elongate spikes, usually spaced along 1 side of the axis of the in-
   florescence; lower lip of corolla ± flat; limited to extreme ne part of nc TX                          J. ovata

Justicia americana (L.) Vahl, (of America), AMERICAN WATER-WILLOW. Plant glabrous, colonial,
rhizomatous, producing long leafy shoots late in summer; stems erect, to ca. 100 cm tall; leaves
sessile or nearly so; leaf blades narrowly oblong-lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate; spikes to 3 cm
long, peduncles to 15 cm long; sepals separate nearly to base, linear-lanceolate, ca. 7 mm long;
corollas 10–12 mm long, white or violet with red-purple dots; capsules ca. 12 mm long. Wet
ground, margins of streams and ponds; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Pla-
teau. May–Jun. m/94

Justicia ovata (Walter) Lindau var. lanceolata (Chapm.) R.W. Long, (sp.: ovate, egg-shaped; var.:
lanceolate, lance-shaped), LANCE-LEAF WATER-WILLOW. Stems erect or spreading, 10–30 cm tall;
leaves sessile or nearly so; leaf blades linear to elliptic-lanceolate, to 10 cm long and 3 cm wide,
minutely puberulent; spikes 3–10 cm long; corollas ca. 9–10 mm long, lavender with darker
markings; capsules 10–15 mm long. Wet areas; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage, also Callahan
Co. (Stanford 1976); mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun. [J. lanceolata
(Chapm.) Small]

                                       RUELLIA WILD PETUNIA
Ours glabrous or pubescent perennial herbs, the base sometimes woody; leaves sessile or short-
petioled; leaf blades narrowly lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate or oblong-elliptic; sepals united a
short distance at base, acuminate; ours with corollas usually lavender to bluish purple, often
with reddish or purple spots down one side, or white (in R. metziae), large and showy, opening
in the morning, falling by late afternoon (some species also produce cleistogamous flowers);
capsules usually explosively dehiscent.
AA genus of ca. 150 species found mainly in tropical areas of the world with a number in tem-
perate North America; some are cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for Jean Ruelle, 1474–1537,
early French herbalist)
214 ACANTHACEAE/RUELLIA

REFERENCES: Tharp & Barkley 1949; Long & Uttal 1962; Long 1961, 1966, 1971, 1973, 1974, 1975;
Turner 1991a.

1. Flowers terminating the main stem in panicle-like inflorescence on long peduncle (lateral few-
   flowered inflorescences of cleistogamous flowers also produced early); corollas white or lavender
   to bluish purple.
   2. Corollas ca. 4–5(–5.5) cm long, lavender to bluish purple, conspicuously curved; calyx lobes
      10–15 mm long in flower                                                                                   R. nudiflora
                                                                                                                           a
   2. Corollas (5–)5.5–6.5 cm long, usually white (sometimes pale bluish purple), very slightly curved;
      calyx lobes 14–20 mm long in flower                                                                        R. metziae
1. Flowers axillary, sessile or in ± peduncled glomerules or cymes OR at tips of side branches; corol-
   las lavender to bluish purple.
   3. Leaf blades linear to linear-lanceolate < 2 cm wide, ≥10 times as long as wide                        R. brittoniana
   3. Leaf blades wider, much < 10 times as long as wide.
      4. Flowers at leafy-bracted tips of branches OR on peduncles from axils of the main axis OR
         the axillary cymose inflorescences branched.
         5. Bracts linear or linear-lanceolate; leaf blades usually lanceolate; flowers on once or twice
            dichotomously branched peduncles                                                             R. malacosperma
         5. Bracts wider; leaf blades wider, lanceolate, oblong, elliptic, or ovate; flowers solitary–3 (or
            rarely loosely cymose) at ends of usually unbranched peduncles.
            6. Largest leaf blades usually < 30 mm wide; ovary pubescent; calyx lobes narrowly
               linear, 1–1.2 mm wide, with prolonged linear-acicular tips                                  R. pedunculata
            6. Largest leaf blades usually > 30 cm wide; ovary glabrous; calyx lobes lanceolate to
               linear-lanceolate, 2–4 mm wide, flat to the tips                                                  R. strepens
      4. Flowers in sessile or short-peduncled glomerules from axils of main stem or main leafy
         branches.
         7. Calyx lobes linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, (1.5–)2–4 mm wide, flat to the tips; flowers
            mainly cleistogamous                                                                                 R. strepens
         7. Calyx lobes narrowly linear, the prolonged tips very slender to almost bristle-like; flowers
            usually chasmogamous, rarely cleistogamous.
            8. Leaves sessile or subsessile (petioles to 3 mm long), erect-ascending (= staying close
               to the stem); common in nc TX                                                                      R. humilis
            8. Leaves subsessile to distinctly petioled, those on main stem with petioles 2–30 mm
               long, mostly spreading away from the stem; rare or of limited range in nc TX, mainly e
               and sc TX.
               9. Glomerules of flowers few, restricted to the upper nodes; leaf blades linear-lanceolate
                  to lanceolate, usually 20 mm or less wide                                                 R. caroliniensis
               9. Glomerules of flowers several–many, extending well down on the stem and branches;
                  leaf blades linear-lanceolate to broadly elliptic or ovate, up to 90 mm wide.
                  10. Leaf blades relatively narrow, linear to lanceolate; fruits often glabrous or with
                       long hairs, to ca. 17 mm long; mainly e TX, no recent collections from nc TX
                                                                                                            R. caroliniensis
                  10. Leaf blades relatively wide (to 90 mm), broadly elliptic to ovate; fruits minutely
                       canescent, ca. 10 mm long; sc TX n to nc TX                                     R. drummondiana

Ruellia brittoniana Leonard, (Nathanial Lord Britton, 1859–1934, botanist at NY Botanical Gar-
den). Plant to 1 m tall; foliage glabrous except for cystoliths (= mineral concretions); bracts linear
to linear-lanceolate; cymes axillary, loose, elongate. Common in nursery trade, readily escapes
cultivation; Tarrant Co., also Dallas Co. (Wasshausen 1966; Turner 1991a); se and e TX w to nc
TX and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Nov. Native to e Mexico. I
                                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 215




                                                                                                                       COROLLA




                                                                                                                        SEED




                                                     Carlowrightia texana [POW]                       Dicliptera brachiata [LUN]
Anisacanthus quadrifidus var. wrightii [HEA, SID]




                        Dyschoriste linearis [LUN]                                  Justicia americana [LUN ]




   Justicia ovata var. lanceolata [CO1]               Ruellia brittoniana [ HEA]                 Ruellia caroliniensis [ST 1]
216 ACANTHACEAE/RUELLIA

Ruellia caroliniensis (J.F. Gmel.) Steud., (of Carolina), SMALL-FLOWER RUELLIA. Plant to ca. 0.9 m
tall, inconspicuously and sparsely pubescent; flowers in sessile or very short peduncled glom-
erules mostly at the upper 1–4 nodes. Sandy open woods and open ground; collected by
Reverchon in Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988), also Henderson Co.; mainly se and e TX. May–Sep. [R.
caroliniensis (J.F. Gmel.) Steud. var. salicina Fernald, R. caroliniensis (J.F. Gmel.) Steud. var.
semicalva Fernald]

Ruellia drummondiana (Nees) A. Gray, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835, Scot-
tish botanist and collector in North America), DRUMMOND’S RUELLIA. Plant to ca. 0.75 m tall,
densely pubescent with short, spreading to appressed hairs. Wooded, riparian, often rocky ar-
eas; Bell, Bosque, and Williamson cos., also Hamilton (HPC), Dallas, and McLennan (Turner
1991a) cos.; sc TX n to nc TX; endemic to TX. Aug–Sep. E

Ruellia humilis Nutt., (dwarf, low-growing), PRAIRIE-PETUNIA, LOW RUELLIA, FRINGE-LEAF
RUELLIA. Plant to ca. 0.8 m tall, usually rather densely short-pilose; leaf blades lanceolate to
ovate or broadly elliptic. Prairies and open woods; se and e TX w to Panhandle and Edwards
Plateau. May–Sep. [R. humilis var. depauperata Tharp & F.A. Barkley, R. humilis var. expansa
Fernald, R. humilis var. longiflora (A. Gray) Fernald] Jones et al. (1997) recognized var.
depauperata .

Ruellia malacosperma Greenm., (soft-seeded), SOFT-SEED RUELLIA. Plant to ca. 0.8 m tall; cys-
toliths numerous; leaf blades glabrous or with a few spreading hairs; loose cymes conspicuous;
peduncles 1–2 times branched, to 8 cm long; capsules 20–25 mm long. Common in nursery
trade, escapes from cultivation; Dallas and Tarrant cos.; probably native to s TX and Mexico.
May–Nov. Turner (1991a) suggested that R. brittoniana and R. malacosperma are “… probably no
more than regional populational leaf variants of the same species.”

Ruellia metziae Tharp, (for Sister Mary Clare Metz, 1907–?, nun and professor of botany at Our
Lady of the Lake College, San Antonio, TX). Plant to ca. 0.6 m tall; leaves petioled; leaf blades
oblong-lanceolate to narrowly ovate-oblong, 3–12 cm long, undulate to toothed; corollas usu-
ally white (sometimes pale bluish purple); cleistogamous flowers sometimes produced early
from axillary peduncles only; this is the only nc TX species that usually has white corollas.
Limestone outcrops, gravel, thickets, and open woods; Bosque, McLennan, and Mills cos., also
Brown, Grayson, (Turner 1991a), Hamilton (HPC), Burnet, and Williamson (Tharp & Barkley
1949) cos.; mainly Lampasas Cut Plain s and sw to c TX and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jul.

Ruellia nudiflora (Engelm. & A. Gray) Urb. var. nudiflora, (naked-flowered), VIOLET RUELLIA.
Stems spreading-pilose, becoming glabrate, to 0.7 m tall; leaves petioled; flowers opening near
sunrise, falling during afternoon; sepals with gland-tipped hairs or hispid-pubescent to
slightly scabrous, without gland-tipped hairs. Sandy open woods; Bell, Bosque, Dallas, Grayson
(Buckner Preserve), Hill, Johnston, McLennan, and Navarro cos.; also Burnet, Williamson
(Turner 1991a), and Brown (HPC) cos.; se and c TX n to nc TX. Apr–May. [R. nudiflora (Engelm.
& A. Gray) Urb. var. hispidula Shinners]

Ruellia nudiflora var. runyonii (Tharp. & F.A. Barkley) B.L. Turner, (for Robert Runyon of
Brownsville, a friend of Tharp and Barkley and student of the vegetation of the lower Rio
Grande Valley), is cited (as R. runyonii) by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), but
apparently occurs only to the s of nc TX. It can be distinguished by its small corollas (< 4
cm long).

Ruellia pedunculata Torr. ex A. Gray, (with a flower stalk), STALKED RUELLIA. Plant to ca. 0.7 m
tall; leaves short-petioled; peduncles to ca. 7 cm long; calyces pilose with slender pointed hairs.
Open woods and along streams; Fannin, Hopkins, and Lamar cos.; se and e TX w to ne part of
nc TX. May–Sep.
                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 217




Ruellia drummondiana [HEA]                     Ruellia humilis [STE ]                 Ruellia malacosperma [HEA]




                             Ruellia nudiflora var. nudiflora [LUN ]                 Ruellia pedunculata [BB2]




  Ruellia metziae [HEA]




                                         Ruellia strepens [BB2]                      Siphonoglossa pilosella [LUN ]
218 ACERACEAE

Ruellia strepens L., (rustling or rattling), LIMESTONE RUELLIA, SMOOTH RUELLIA. Stems to ca. 1 m
tall, glabrous or pubescent in lines; leaves petioled; leaf blades ovate- or elliptic-lanceolate,
acute; peduncles 1–3-flowered, leafy-bracted, the bracts lanceolate to elliptic-ovate. Stream and
hillside woods; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also Hamilton (HPC) and Brown (Stanford
1976) cos., also Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun, with solitary, open flowers, also Sep–Oct, with clus-
tered, often smaller, open or usually cleistogamous flowers. [R. strepens var. cleistantha A. Gray]

Ruellia davisiorum Tharp & F.A. Barkley, (for L. Irby Davis and Anna Tarrance Davis of
Harlingen, TX, friends of Tharp and Barkley and donors of collections), cited by Hatch et al.
(1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), apparently occurs only to the s of nc TX. It is similar to R.
metziae , but differs in having bluish lavender corollas and short (3–6 cm long), ovate to broadly
ovate leaf blades.

                             SIPHONOGLOSSA TUBETONGUE
AA genus of 7 species of mostly tropical America. (Greek: siphono, a tube or pipe, and glossa,
tongue, possibly in reference to the stamens of some species being exserted from the corolla
tube)

Siphonoglossa pilosella (Nees) Torr., (little pilose—covered with long soft hairs), HAIRY
TUBETONGUE, TUBETONGUE, FALSE HONEYSUCKLE. Low suffrutescent perennial; leaves subsessile;
leaf blades ovate to oval, to 4 cm long; flowers solitary in axils or on short axillary peduncles 4
mm or less long; floral bracts none; bractlets subtending the calyces small, to 2.5 mm long; co-
rollas lavender to rose or white, to 28 mm long, the tube slender, cylindric, elongate, the upper
lip entire or 2-lobed, the lower lip 3-lobed, much larger, typically with a white spot and purple
dots at base; stamens inserted near mouth of corolla tube; capsules 8–9 mm long. Rocky, sandy
or grassy areas; Brown, Callahan, Mills, and Stephens cos.; mostly s 2/3 of TX. Apr–Oct. Jones et
al. (1997) treated this species in the genus Justicia [as J. pilosella (Nees) Hilsenb. [ined.]].

                                 THUNBERGIA CLOCKVINE
AAn Old World tropical genus of 90 species of climbing or erect herbs and shrubs with bracts
enclosing the calyces; a number are cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for Carl Peter Thunberg,
1743–1828, Swedish student and successor of Linnaeus and traveler to Asia and South Africa)

Thunbergia alata Bojer ex Sims, (winged), BLACK-EYED-SUSAN, BLACK-EYED CLOCKVINE. Peren-
nial, herbaceous, trailing or climbing vine often grown as an annual; stems usually ca. 1 m long;
tendrils absent; leaf blades 2.5–8 cm long, ovate to triangular ovate, apically acute, basally cor-
date to ± hastate, entire to few-toothed, pubescent; petioles wing-margined, often nearly as long
as blades; flowers usually axillary, solitary, pedunculate, subtended by 2 conspicuous foliaceous
bracts ca. 15 mm long; calyces small, hidden by the bracts; corollas large and showy, 2.5–4 cm
long, yellow to orange, cream, or white, with a dark purple center, with a slender tube and a
spreading 5-lobed limb; lobes of limb rounded distally, not differing greatly in size or shape;
stamens 4; capsules 8–10 mm in diam., with a stout beak ca. 10 mm long. Long cultivated in nc
TX (an 1885 Reverchon collection is known from Dallas—Wasshausen 1966) and known to es-
cape in se, e, and s TX and the Edwards Plateau; included because of possibily of escape in nc
TX. Mar–Apr. Native of Africa. I


                          ACERACEAE MAPLE FAMILY
AA small (113 species in 2 genera) of trees and shrubs of n temperate areas and tropical moun-
tains; the genus Dipteronia with 2 species of c and s China has fruits winged all the way
around. Aceraceae are closely related to Sapindaceae and appear to represent a clade within
                                                                                        ACER/ACERACEAE 219

that family. From a cladistic standpoint they should be lumped to form a more inclusive, mono-
phyletic Sapindaceae (Judd et al. 1994). (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: trees with leaves opposite, simple and palmately lobed and
veined or in 1 species pinnately compound; fruits distinctive—of 2 one-seeded, winged samaras.
REFERENCES: Brizicky 1963b; Murray 1970; Judd et al. 1994.

                                             ACER MAPLE
Polygamo-dioecious or dioecious, deciduous trees with watery often sweet sap; leaves opposite,
simple and palmately lobed or pinnately compound; flowers pedicellate, in racemes, panicles,
or corymbose or in umbellate fascicles, radially symmetrical, small, mostly 5-merous, usually
completely or functionally unisexual; ovary superior; fruit a schizocarp of 2 one-seeded,
winged samaras which eventually separate and function as wind-dispersed small “helicopters.”
AA genus of 111 species of trees and shrubs of the n temperate zone and tropical mountains.
Some species are important sources of maple syrup (e.g., A. saccharum Marsh.—SUGAR MAPLE) or
as ornamentals, these often with brightly colored fall foliage. Others are valued for their timber
which yields a hard, usually white wood used in furniture, musical instruments, flooring,
gunstocks, etc. (Latin name of the maple; also meaning sharp, referring to the hard wood)
REFERENCES: Desmaris 1952; Gehlbach & Gardner 1983.

1. Leaves pinnately compound with 3–5(–9) distinct leaflets                                          A. negundo
1. Leaves simple (but lobed).
   2. Central lobe of leaf narrowed basally where it joins the other lobes; leaves silvery-white
      beneath                                                                                    A. saccharinum
   2. Central lobe of leaf not narrowed basally; leaves light green to somewhat silvery-white
      beneath.
      3. Spaces (= sinuses) between the main lobes of the leaf rounded or U-shaped; margins of
         leaf lobes entire or somewhat lobulate; plants of areas near the Edwards Plateau
                                                                                            A. grandidentatum
      3. Spaces between the main lobes of the leaf ± sharply angled or V-shaped; margins of leaf
         lobes coarsely toothed; plants mainly of e TX                                                A. rubrum

Acer grandidentatum Nutt. var. sinuosum (Rehder) Little, (sp.: large-toothed; var.: wavy-mar-
gined), PLATEAU BIG-TOOTH MAPLE, UVALDE BIG-TOOTH MAPLE, LIMEROCK MAPLE. Flowers appear-
ing as the leaves are expanding or after; petals absent; sinus between the two samaras U-shaped;
samaras to ca. 31 mm long, typically much shorter. Limestone canyons; Bell Co. (HPC), also
Coryell Co. (Gehlbach & Gardner 1983); Edwards Plateau n to Lampasas Cut Plain; other vari-
eties are found in far w TX. While we are following Hatch et al. (1990), Kartesz (1994), and Jones
et al. (1997) in terms of nomenclature, the most appropriate name for this taxon is not com-
pletely clear. It is closely related to and is sometimes put into A. saccharum Marshall (SUGAR
MAPLE) [as A. saccharum var. sinuosum (Rehder) Sarg.]. Gehlbach and Gardner (1983) argued
that all the relict maple populations in nc, c, and w TX should be treated as A. saccharum var.
floridanum (Chapm.) Small & A. Heller (SOUTHERN SUGAR MAPLE).

Acer negundo L., (from the native name of Vitex negundo, because of supposed similarity of
leaves), BOX-ELDER, ASH-LEAF MAPLE, ARCE, FRESNO DE GUAJUCO. Leaflets pinnately veined; ter-
minal leaflet elliptic to obovate; lateral leaflets narrower and coarsely few-toothed to entire;
flowers appearing just before the leaves, greenish; petals absent; samaras ca. 25–35 mm long.
Stream banks, low woods. (Feb–)late Mar–Apr. Leaves with 3 leaflets can sometimes resemble
and be confused with those of POISON-IVY. However, BOX-ELDER has opposite leaves in contrast
to the alternate leaves of POISON-IVY and most other Anacardiaceae. This is by far the most com-
mon Acer in nc TX.
220 AIZOACEAE/TRIANTHEMA

1. Younger twigs glabrous                                                               var.. negundo
1. Younger twigs coated with short velvety pubescence                                   var.. texanum

var. negundo. Mainly in the e 1/2 of TX.

var. texanum Pax, (of Texas), TEXAS BOX-ELDER. Se and e TX w to Blackland Prairie.

Acer rubrum L., (red), RED MAPLE, SCARLET MAPLE. Branchlets and petioles usually reddish; flow-
ers appearing before the leaves develop, reddish; petals ca. 2 mm long; sinus between the 2 sa-
maras V-shaped; samaras usually 15–25 mm long. Low woods; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage,
also Fannin Co. (Little 1971); mainly se and e TX. Feb–Apr. The leaves become bright crimson in
autumn. Varieties are often recognized (Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997); in var. rubrum the lower
surface of the leaf blades are glabrous or with hairs only along the veins while in var. trilobum
Torr. & A. Gray ex K. Koch and var. drummondii (Hook. & Arn. ex Nutt.) Sarg. the lower surface
of the leaf blades are densely and usually permanently hairy; var. trilobum is differentiated by
having the leaf blades with only 3 lobes, the smaller lateral basal lobes suppressed, while var.
rubrum and var. drummondii have leaf blades usually with 5 lobes (the lateral basal lobes
small). The leaves and bark are poisonous and have caused the death of livestock (Fuller &
McClintock 1986). 9

Acer saccharinum L., (sugary, from the sap), SILVER MAPLE, SOFT MAPLE. Leaves deeply 5-lobed,
spaces between the main lobes of the leaf ± sharply angled or V-shaped; margins of leaf lobes
coarsely toothed; flowers appearing before the leaves develop or immediately with them, green-
ish or reddish; petals absent; sinus between the two samaras V-shaped, samaras to 50(–60) mm
long. Naturalized in sandy low woods, wooded lake shore, and stream banks; Grayson and
Lamar cos.; introduced to TX; native further e in North America. Feb(?)–Mar.


       AIZOACEAE ICEPLANT OR FIG-MARIGOLD FAMILY
AA medium-large (1,850 species in 128 genera), tropical and subtropical family of betalain-
containing, succulent herbs or small shrubs centered in s Africa; most have the CAM type of
photosynthesis, a physiological adaptation for hot dry conditions; some are cultivated as orna-
mentals including the PEBBLE PLANTS or LIVING STONES (Lithops) that mimic rocks and Mesem-
bryanthemum (ICEPLANT), a huge genus now split into over 100 segregate genera. Mollugo and
Glinus, treated here in the Molluginaceae, were formerly included in the Aizoaceae. Family
name from Aizoon, a genus of 25 species of the Mediterranean, s Africa, and Australia. (Latin
name for an evergreen plant) (subclass Caryophyllidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is a succulent, decumbent herb with
opposite or subopposite leaves, inconspicuous axillary flowers, and circumscissile capsules.
REFERENCES: Bogle 1970; Hartmann 1993; Behnke & Mabry 1994.

                   TRIANTHEMA HORSE-PURSLANE, SEA-PURSLANE
AA genus of 17 species of warm areas of the world, especially Australia; some contain alka-
loids and are used medicinally. (Greek: tri, three, and anthemon, flower)

Trianthema portulacastrum L., (with flowers like Portulaca—purslane), DESERT HORSE-
PURSLANE , SEA-PURSLANE, VERDOLAGA BLANCA. Glabrous, succulent, annual herb branching
from the base; branches usually decumbent; leaves subopposite to opposite, in unequal pairs,
petiolate; leaf blades broadly obovate to nearly orbicular, to ca. 4 cm long; flowers solitary, axil-
lary, sessile; calyx lobes 5, ca. 2.5 mm long, pinkish purple within, green outside; petals absent;
stamens 5–10; ovary superior; fruit a 1–several-seeded capsule ca. 4 mm long with prominent
winged appendages at apex, circumscissile near the middle. Sandy soils and waste ground; Dal-
las, Grayson, and Tarrant cos.; mainly s and w TX. May–Oct.
                                                                         ALTERNANTHERA/AMARANTHACEAE 221


    AMARANTHACEAE AMARANTH OR PIGWEED FAMILY
Ours annual or perennial, often weedy herbs; leaves opposite in our species (except
Amaranthus), simple, entire or nearly so; stipules absent; inflorescences axillary or terminal, of
small clusters, head-like, or in spikes or spike-like racemes or compact panicles; flowers very
small, each subtended or enclosed by 3 scarious or prominently scarious-margined bracts/
bracteoles, perfect or unisexual; tepals 0–5 in 1 series; stamens usually 5; pistil 1; ovary superior;
fruit a dehiscent or indehiscent urticle.
AA medium-sized (750 species in 71 genera) family of mostly herbs or shrubs, climbers, or
rarely trees of tropical and warm areas of the world with a few in temperate regions; the family
includes a number of ornamentals (e.g., Celosia—COCKSCOMB) and weeds as well as grain crops
(e.g., Amaranthus); pigments present are of the nitrogen-containing type known as betalains
(Cronquist & Thorne 1994). Molecular evidence indicates the family is most closely related to
Chenopodiaceae (Downie & Palmer 1994). (subclass Caryophyllidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs with simple leaves entire or nearly so and very small
apetalous flowers in usually dense inflorescences; flowers subtended by scarious often colored
bracts; filaments united. Chenopodiaceae are similar in flower structure (e.g., very small, lack-
ing petals), but lack scarious bracts and have separate filaments.
REFERENCES : Standley 1917; Reed 1969b; Robertson 1981; Townsend 1993; Downie & Palmer
1994; Behnke & Mabry 1994.

1. Leaves alternate                                                                                    Amaranthus
1. Leaves opposite.
   2. Stems and leaves densely stellate-pubescent (at least young portions); plants with gray-
      green foliage and inconspicuous flowers in small axillary clusters lacking white or colored
      bracts; in extreme w part of nc TX                                                               Tidestromia
   2. Stems and leaves without stellate hairs; plants not as above; widespread in nc TX.
      3. Inflorescence a panicle up to 20 cm broad; flowers unisexual                                       Iresine
      3. Inflorescence a h ead or narrow spike (a number of these can be grouped together); flowers
         perfect.
         4. Flowers in large, globose to short cylindric heads 2–2.8 cm in diam., often variously
            colored and showy                                                                          Gomphrena
         4. Flowers in much smaller heads, short thick spikes, or elongate inflorescences, neither
            colored nor showy (but sometimes strikingly whitish).
            5. Flowers in narrow, elongating, single or grouped spikes; tepals united                    Froelichia
            5. Flowers in heads or short thick spikes; tepals separate.
               6. Floral bracts slightly shorter than or longer than the tepals; tepals acuminate or
                  awn-tipped                                                                         Alternantheraa
               6. Floral bracts about half as long as the tepals; tepals subacute or acute          Gossypianthus


                              ALTERNANTHERA CHAFF-FLOWER
Ours perennials; leaves opposite, entire; inflorescences in head-like spikes, flowers perfect;
tepals usually 5, separate; fruit an utricle.
AA genus of 100 species of tropical and warm areas, especially the Americas; some are edible
while others, because of their colorful leaves, are used as bedding plants. (Latin: alternans, alter-
nating, and anthera , an anther, referring to the sterile alternate anthers)
REFERENCES: Melville 1958; Buckingham 1996.

1. Inflorescences sessile or nearly so, the peduncles at most 1 cm long; plants terrestrial in sandy
   disturbed areas and waste places; leaf blades spatulate to suborbicular, 8–20 mm long             A. caracasana
222 AMARANTHACEAE/AMARANTHUS

1. Inflorescences pedunculate, the peduncles ca. 2–7 cm long; plants aquatic or semi-terrestrial;
   leaf blades linear to linear-lanceolate or obovate, 20–110 mm long                          A. philoxeroides

Alternanthera caracasana Kunth, (of Caracas, Venezuela), MAT CHAFF-FLOWER, VERDOLAGA DE
PUERCO. Stems prostrate, branched, sometimes hirsute; leaves clustered; leaf blades glabrous or
sparsely pubescent (chiefly beneath and on margins), dark green and glossy above; floral bracts
and tepals creamy white; tepals awn-tipped, unequal, at least the shorter ones pubescent with
numerous barbed hairs. Disturbed areas and waste places; w Blackland Prairie s and w to w TX.
Jun–Oct. There are questions concerning the native range of this species; Henrickson (1993) in-
dicated it is native to Central and South America; however, Robertson (1981), in his treatment of
the family for the se U.S, considered it native to the s U.S.; Hatch et al. (1991) treated it as native to
TX. [A. peploides (Humb. & Bonpl. ex Schult.) Urb.]

Alternanthera philoxeroides (Mart.) Griseb., (like Philoxerus, an Australian genus of
Amaranthaceae), ALLIGATOR-WEED . Trailing and mat-forming with erect flowering stems;
leaves well-spaced on flowering stems, thick and fleshy, glabrous; floral bracts 1/4 as long as
tepals; tepals nearly equal, glabrous, silvery white. Aquatic or in very wet areas; Dallas and Tar-
rant cos. (both along the Trinity River); mainly se TX. Mar–Aug. Native of South America.
[Achyranthes philoxeroides (Mart.) Standl.] This species can be a problematic weed contribut-
ing to clogging of aquatic habitats (Buckingham 1996). In Texas, ALLIGATOR-WEED is considered
a “harmful or potentially harmful exotic plant” and it is illegal to release, import, sell, purchase,
propagate, or possess this species in the state (Harvey 1998). The species was first reported in
the se U.S. in Florida in 1894; it subsequently spread widely and in some areas formed nearly
pure stands, outcompeting native vegetation; biological controls (various insects) have been
used; the species apparently does not produce viable seeds in the U.S.—reproduction occurs by
plant fragments (Robertson 1981). I

                      AMARANTHUS GREEN PIGWEED, AMARANTH
Ours annuals with taproots; leaves alternate; inflorescence of dense, terminal or axillary spikes
or panicles; flowers perfect or unisexual; fruit a 1-seeded, circumcissile, irregularly splitting or
indehiscent utricle; seeds lenticular.
A A genus of 60 species of tropical and temperate areas of the world. As treated here,
Amaranthus includes the segregates Acnida and Acantochiton. The seeds of Amaranthus spe-
cies were used as a major “grain” crop by Native Americans in pre-Colombian times (e.g., A.
caudatus L.—INCA-WHEAT, A. hybridus—especially in Mexico). The protein-rich leaves have
been used for millenia and are one of the most common vegetables in the tropics; 9 some spe-
cies, however, can accumulate toxic levels of nitrates (Cheatham & Johnston 1995); some are
cultivated as ornamentals; others are widespread weeds considered by some to be among the
worst annual garden weeds—they grow rapidly and can produce hundreds of thousands of
seeds which can survive dormant in the soil for decades (Baumgardt 1982). Hybridization is
common and widespread in the genus (Sauer 1955). (Greek: amaranthos, unfading, because the
dry calyx and bracts are persistent)
REFERENCES: Sauer 1955, 1967.

1. Floral bracts subtending individual flowers much enlarged, enfolding and concealing the
   flowers, and broadly cordate in fruit; rare in nc TX                                         A. acanthochiton
1. Floral bracts subtending individual flowers not much enlarged, neither enfolding and conceal-
   ing the flower nor cordate in fruit; including species widespread in nc TX.
   2. Flowers in small axillary clusters, main stem and branches leafy to tip.
      3. Tepals with tips broader than base, somewhat spatulate, 3-nerved, apiculate; stems erect; s
         part of nc TX                                                                            A. polygonoides
                                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 223




                                             Acer grandidentatum var. sinuosum [SA1]         Acer negundo var. negundo [SA5.8]
Thunbergia alata [LUN]




                         Acer rubrum [SA3]                                             Acer saccharinum [SA3]




Trianthema portulacastrum [GLE]                  Alternanthera caracasana [FAW]               Alternanthera philoxeroides [REE]
224 AMARANTHACEAE/AMARANTHUS

     3. Tepals oblong or lanceolate, narrowed at tip, 1-nerved, acute to acuminate; stems prostrate
        or erect; widespread in nc TX.
        4. Plants prostrate; tepals 4 or 5                                                                   A. blitoides
        4. Plants stiffly erect; tepals 3                                                                        A. albus
  2. Flowers in terminal, spike-like panicles (often some of the lower ones also axillary); main stem
     and branches with reduced leaves or none apically.
     5. Upper leaf axils and lower flower clusters with long spines (5–10 mm long)                           A. spinosus
     5. Upper leaf axils and inflorescence without spines (but bracts can be prickly).
        6. Bracts at base of flowers 1.5—2.5 mm long; pistillate tepals 1 or 2 with 1 rudimentary (or
           5 in the rare A. arenicola); staminate and pistillate flowers on separate plants (= dioecious);
           inflorescences not noticably prickly to the touch.
           7. Pistillate tepals 0, 1 or 2; bracts with midveins clearly excurrent or not so; outer stami-
              nate tepals acuminate; including a species very abundant in nc TX.
              8. Plants pistillate.
                 9. Tepals 2, 1 of these well-developed, ca. 2 mm long; fruits with circumscissile dehis-
                     cence; midrib of bracts clearly excurrent; very abundant in nc TX                          A. rudis
                 9. Tepals completely absent or if present rudimentary (< 1 mm long); fruits in-
                     dehiscent or irregularly dehiscent; midrib of bracts not conspicuously excurrent;
                     rare in nc TX                                                                           A. australis
              8. Plants staminate.
                 10. Bracts ca. 2 mm or slightly more in length, with heavy midribs; outer tepals defi-
                       nitely longer than the inner; very abundant in nc TX                                      A. rudis
                 10. Bracts 1.5–1.8 mm long, usually with slender midribs; outer tepals not apprecia-
                      bly longer than the inner; rare in nc TX                                               A. australis
           7. Pistillate tepals 5; bracts with midveins barely if at all excurrent; staminate tepals
              obtuse or retuse (= slightly notched at apex); rare in nc TX, reported only from Bell Co.
                                                                                                       A. arenicola
       6. Bracts at base of flower 3–6 mm long; pistillate tepals usually 3–5; plant dioecious OR
          staminate and pistillate flowers on the same plant (= monoecious) OR flowers perfect;
          inflorescences prickly to the touch OR not so.
          11. Plants dioecious; bracts 4–6 mm long; tepals 2.5–4.5 mm long with conspicuous ex-
              tension of the midvien; terminal spikes long, 15–70(–120) cm, often lax or drooping
              to erect, usually prickly to the touch                                                      A. palmerii
          11. Plants monoecious or flowers perfect; bracts 3–5 mm long; tepals 1.5–3.2 mm long,
              with less obvious extension of the midrib; terminal spikes to ca. 20 cm long, usually
              erect, usually not prickly to the touch.
              12. Spikes slender, 6–10(–12) mm broad; tepals acute, 1.5–2(–2.5) mm long                 A. hybridus
              12. Spikes thick, 10–20 mm broad; tepals rounded to truncate, usually notched apically,
                  often mucronate, 2.5–3.2 mm long                                                    A. retroflexus

Amaranthus acanthochiton J.D. Sauer, (named for the genus Acanthochiton, that word derived
from roots meaning thorny hard outer covering), GREENSTRIPE. Stems erect, to 0.8 m tall; seeds
1–1.25 mm in diam., dark reddish brown. Sandy or rocky areas; included based on citation of
vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); se TX nw to nc TX and w to Trans-
Pecos. Jul–Oct. [Acanthochiton wrightiiTorr.]

Amaranthus albus L., (white), TUMBLEWEED, TUMBLEWEED AMARANTH, WHITE AMARANTH. Stems
erect, stiff, whitish or pale green, 0.2–1.2 m tall; branches spreading; seeds 0.6–0.8 mm in diam.,
reddish brown, shiny. Disturbed sites; widespread in TX. Aug–Dec.

Amaranthus arenicola I.M. Johnst., (growing in sandy places), TORREY’S AMARANTH, SANDHILL
AMARANTH. Plant erect, to 2(–3) m tall; seeds 1–1.3 mm in diam., dark reddish brown, shiny.
                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 225




  /
                                                           ?
                                                                                                                /
                /


                         Amaranthus acanthochiton [ EN2]                                       ?


                                                                                   Amaranthus albus [REE]




                                                  Amaranthus australis [FAW]




Amaranthus arenicola [HEA]




                                      Amaranthus blitoides [REE]                    Amaranthus hybridus [GLE]
226 AMARANTHACEAE/AMARANTHUS

Sandy areas; Bell Co. (Reed 1969b); widespread in TX. [A. torreyi of authors, not. (A. Gray) Benth.
ex S. Watson]

Amaranthus australis (A. Gray) J.D. Sauer, (southern), SOUTHERN WATER-HEMP, SOUTHERN AMA-
RANTH. Plant erect, 2–3(–9!) m tall; seeds 1–1.25 mm in diam., dark reddish brown to black, shiny.
Marshy places; Dallas, Denton, and Ellis cos.; central TX nw to nc TX. May–Aug. [Acnida aus-
tralis A. Gray, Acnida cuspidata Bertero ex Spreng.]

Amaranthus blitoides S. Watson, (resembling blithe—a common name for Chenopodium spe-
cies), PROSTRATE PIGWEED, QUELITE MANCHADO. Stems prostrate to rarely ascending, trailing and
forming mats, to 1 m long, glabrous or nearly so; leaf blades oblong-oblanceolate; seeds 1.3–1.6
mm in diam., black, dull. Disturbed sites, weedy areas; widespread in TX. Jun–Oct. [Amaranthus
graecizans of authors, not L.]

Amaranthus hybridus L., (hybrid), GREEN AMARANTH, SLENDER PIGWEED, SLIM AMARANTH,
SPLEEN AMARANTH, QUELITE DE COCHINO, QUELITE MORADO. Stems erect, stout, 0.5–1.5(–2.5) m
tall; spikes slender, 6–10(–12) mm broad, terminal and axillary; fruits dehiscent; seeds round,
1.1–1.3 mm in diam., black, shiny. Pioneer weed, disturbed areas; Brown Co., also Bell Co. (Reed
1969b); widespread but more common in w part of state. May–Oct. Native to e North America,
also Mexico to n South America; naturalized weed in Mediterranean region, South Africa, Aus-
tralia, and e Asia (Correll & Johnston 1970).

Amaranthus palmeri S. Watson, (for its discoverer, Edward Palmer, 1831–1911, English-American
surgeon and botanist, collected in w U.S. and Mexico), CARELESSWEED , PALMER’S PIGWEED ,
PALMER’S AMARANTH, REDROOT. Plant erect, 1–2(–3) m tall; branches of inflorescence often very
long, densely flowered, cylindrical, half-drooping; seeds 1–1.3 mm in diam., dark reddish brown.
Disturbed sites and weedy areas; widespread in TX, often abundant. Jun–Oct. Implicated in
livestock poisoning through the accumulation of nitrates (Kingsbury 1964; Burlage 1968). 9

Amaranthus polygonoides L., (resembling Polygonum—knotweed), TROPICAL AMARANTH,
BERLANDIER’S AMARANTH. Stems erect, stiff, 0.15–0.3 m tall, branching from the base; branches
spreading, prostrate to ascending; seeds ca. 1 mm in diam., black, shiny. Disturbed sites;
McLennan and Brown cos.; s TX n to s part of nc TX and w to Trans-Pecos. May–Oct.
[Amaranthus berlandieri (Moq.) Uline & W.L. Bray]

Amaranthus retroflexus L., (reflexed or twisted back), RED-ROOT PIGWEED, ROUGH PIGWEED,
GREEN AMARANTH, QUELITE. Plants erect, 0.3–3 m tall; fruits deshicent; seeds 1 mm in diam., dark
reddish brown, shiny. Disturbed sites; Collin, Dallas, Grayson, Jack, and Tarrant cos., also Bell
Co. (Reed 1969b); nearly throughout TX. May–Oct. Apparently introduced in Texas; first found
in the state in 1894 (Mahler 1988). A cosmopolitan weed possibly native to the e U.S. Animals
may be poisoned from eating the plants due to the accumulation of large amounts of nitrates
(Burlage 1968; Stephens 1980). 9

Amaranthus rudis J.D. Sauer, (wild), NUTTALL’S WATER-HEMP, WATER-HEMP. Plant highly variable,
glabrous, 0.15–2.5 m tall; seeds ca. 1 mm in diam., dark reddish brown. Low, moist, disturbed
sites, fields; invader species; nearly throughout TX. Late Apr–Oct. [Acnida tamariscina of au-
thors, not (Nutt.) A.W. Wood, Amaranthus tamariscinus of authors, not Nutt.] One of the most
abundant native weeds of late summer and fall.

Amaranthus spinosus L., (full of spines), SPINY PIGWEED, THORNY AMARANTH, QUELITE ESPINSO.
Plant erect, 0.2–1.2 m tall; the only species in nc TX with distinct spines; leaf blades ovate to
rhombic-lanceolate; seeds 0.7–1 mm in diam., black, shiny. Disturbed sites; Bell, Cooke, Dallas,
Grayson, and Tarrant cos., also Denton and Williamson cos. (Reed 1969b); se and e TX w to East
                                                                               FROELICHIA /AMARANTHACEAE 227

Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. May–Oct. Pantropical weed. Reported to cause internal
mechanical injury and bloat in livestock if ingested (Burlage 1968). I

Amaranthus blitum L., (old name for Chenopodium capitatum (L.) Asch.—strawberry-blite),
(GREEN AMARANTH), is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) but apparently
occurs only to the e and s of nc TX. It is monoecious and somewhat similar to A. retroflexus and
A. hybridus, but erect or prostrate, 1 m or less tall, with lateral spikes not much shorter than the
terminal, and with indehiscent fruits. Native of Europe. [A. ascendens Loisel., A. lividus L.] I

                       FROELICHIA SNAKE-COTTON, COTTONWEED
Ours annuals, gray with ± matted pubescence, simple or with long, erect or partly decumbent
branches from basal part of plant; leaves few, mostly in basal part of plant; leaf blades oblong or
oblanceolate; inflorescences leafless; floral bracts white or yellowish, unequal, shorter than the
perianth; flowers perfect; perianth densely and obviously woolly outside, becoming hardened
at maturity; petals absent; stamens with united filaments forming a scarious tube, resembling
an additional inner perianth; fruit an utricle surrounded by the hardened perianth.
AA genus of 18 species of warm areas of the Americas and the Galapagos Islands. Hybridiza-
tion between species is not uncommon. (Named for Joseph Aloys Froelich, 1766–1841, a German
botanist)

1. Fruiting spikes 1–10 cm long, 10–13 mm thick, appearing whitish when fresh; fruiting perianth
   4–6 mm long, usually with entire or deeply dentate to lacerate wings or crests; main stem usually
   erect, 2.5–7 mm thick near base, with few branches; plants 40–130 cm tall                           F. floridana
1. Fruiting spikes 1–3 cm long, 7–8 mm thick, appearing grayish when fresh; fruiting perianth usu-
   ally 2–3.5 mm long, usually distinctly spiny; main stem bent at base or with several near-basal
   branches with lower internodes widely spreading or decumbent, 1–3 mm thick; plants 10–50
   cm tall                                                                                               F. gracilis

Froelichia floridana (Nutt.) Moq., (of Florida), FIELD SNAKE-COTTON. Fruiting perianth with nar-
row to broad, nearly entire to deeply dentate or lacerate wings or crests down the keels, and
with one or few teeth or short spines on the faces at base or occasionally up to the middle. Loose
sandy soils, often abundant on roadsides and disturbed sites; throughout TX. Jun–Oct. Virtu-
ally all of our plants would seem referable to var. campestris (Small) Fernald. However, while
this variety is often recognized (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997), because of the lack of con-
sistently recognizable differences, we are not formally recognizing varieties. [F. campestris
Small, F. floridana var. campestris Small] Wind-pollinated and considered a cause of hay fever
(Ajilvsgi 1984).

Froelichia gracilis (Hook.) Moq., (graceful), SLENDER SNAKE-COTTON. Fruiting perianth spinier
than in F. floridana, with rows of distinct and rather sharp, separate or united, spiny teeth on
keels and a tooth at base of each face. Sandy or gravelly ground; throughout much of TX except
far e part. Jun–Oct. According to McGregor (1986), F. floridana and F. gracilis often grow to-
gether and “… putative hybrids between the two are all too frequent.”

Froelichia drummondii Moq., (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish bota-
nist and collector in North America), DRUMMOND’S SNAKE-COTTON, is cited by Reed (1969b) for
Tarrant Co. based on a 1925 Ruth collection; this taxon, which is extremely similar to if not con-
specific with F. floridana, is apparently otherwise unknown from nc TX. Reed (1969b) distin-
guished it from F. floridana (calyx crests deeply dentate) by its merely erose, crenulate or entire
calyx crests. Waterfall (1972) lumped F. drummondii with F. floridana.
228 AMARANTHACEAE/GOMPHRENA

                                GOMPHRENA GLOBE-AMARANTH
AA genus of ca. 120 species of tropical and warm areas of the New World and Australia; a
number are cultivated as ornamentals. (Modification of Pliny’s Gromphaena, a species of
amaranth)
REFERENCE: Mears 1980.

Gomphrena globosa L., (globose, spherical), COMMON GLOBE-AMARANTH. Annual; stems stout,
usually much branched, sometimes simple, to 1 m tall; leaves opposite; leaf blades mostly ob-
long to ovate, entire; flowers perfect, in showy, pedunculate, subglobose heads 2–2.8 cm in
diam.; heads variously colored, purple, orange, rose, white, or varigated; perianth usually
woolly; filaments united into a slender tube. Widely cultivated ornamental that sometimes es-
capes; Cooke and Tarrant cos.; also s TX and Edwards Plateau. Jul–Sep. Native of s Asia. The
flowering heads superficially resemble those of CLOVER species. I

Gomphrena haageana Klotzsch, (for J.N. Haage, 1826–1878, a seed grower of Erfurt, Germany),
HAAGE’S GLOBE-AMARANTH, a perennial with leaf blades oblanceolate to oblong-linear and
heads light red with yellow florets, is sometimes cultivated in nc TX and might be expected to
escape; it is native to the w Edwards Plateau.

                              GOSSYPIANTHUS COTTON-FLOWER
AA genus of 2 species, 1 from OK through TX to adjacent Mexico and in Hispanola, and the other
restricted to Cuba (Henrickson 1987); it has often been included in Guilleminea . (Latin: gossy-
pion, cotton, and Greek: anthemon, flower, presumably in reference to the densely lanate tepals)
REFERENCES: Mears 1967; Henrickson 1987.

Gossypianthus lanuginosus (Poir.) Moq., (woolly). Perennial herb; stems often procumbent,
sometimes ascending; leaves opposite; rosette leaves with wide-winged petiole without chloro-
phyll; cauline leaves short-petioled, oval to obovate; inflorescence a spike of 6–12 axillary flow-
ers; flowers sessile, 5-merous, perfect; tepals 3-nerved, green between nerves, densely lanate
with silky hairs; stamens 5; style 1; stigmas capitate, bilobed; fruit a membranous, indehiscent
utricle; seeds 1 mm long, brown, shiny. Dry soils, sandy, rocky, or disturbed areas. A highly vari-
able species sometimes divided into several varieties; 2 are recognized here.

1. Leaves densely pilose or tomentose, especially beneath; rosette leaves lanceolate or oblanceolate
   to spatulate, 4–12 mm wide, obtuse to acute                                                     var. lanuginosus
1. Leaves nearly glabrous; rosette leaves usually linear to lanceolate, 3–6 mm wide, acute           var. tenuiflorus

var. lanuginosus, WOOLLY COTTON-FLOWER. Throughout most of TX. [Guilleminea lanuginosa
(Poir.) Hook. f., Guilleminea lanuginosa (Poir.) Hook. f. var. rigidiflora (Hook.) Mears,
Guilleminea lanuginosa (Poir.) Hook. f. var. sheldonii (Uline & W.L. Bray) Mears]

var. tenuiflorus (Hook.) Mears ex Henr., (slender-flowered), LANCE-LEAF COTTON-FLOWER. Mainly
parts of e 1/3 of TX. [Guilleminea lanuginosa (Poir.) Hook. f. var. tenuiflora (Hook.) Mears]

                                          IRESINE BLOODLEAF
Ours monoecious or dioecious herbs; leaves opposite, petiolate; leaf blades thin, entire or serru-
late; inflorescence a panicle of numerous, small flowers, often whitish to straw-colored due to
bracts and perianths; perianth 5-parted; pistillate flowers subtended by conspicuous white
wool; stamens 5; fruit an indehiscent utricle; seeds dark red, shiny.
AA genus of ca. 80 species of tropical and temperate areas, especially the Americas and Aus-
tralia; some are used medicinally while others are cultivated for their ornamental foliage.
(Greek: eiresione , a staff or branch wound with wool, from the calyx, often bearing long hairs)
                                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 229




Amaranthus palmeri [CO1]                                      Amaranthus polygonoides [HEA]           Amaranthus retroflexus [REE]




                                                                                                 Froelichia gracilis [GLE, IPL]


      Amaranthus rudis [CO1]


                                                         Amaranthus spinosus [GLE]




                                                                      VARIATION
                                                                          IN
                                                                      PERIANTH




                           Froelichia floridana [GLE , RAD]                                     Gomphrena globosa [NIC]
230 ANACARDIACEAE

REFERENCE: Henrickson & Sundberg 1986.

1. Plants annual or perennial from a vertical root; stems usually much-branched; tepals of pistillate
   flowers 3-nerved, acute or obtuse, longer than the utricle; plants monoecious; rare in nc
   TX                                                                                                             I. diffusa
1. Plants perennial with horizontal rhizomes; stems usually unbranched up to the inflorescence;
   tepals of pistillate flowers (look inside of small tepal-like bracts) faintly 1-nerved, acute, equaling
   or usually shorter than the utricle; plants dioecious; widespread in nc TX                              I. rhizomatosa

Iresine diffusa Humb. & Bonpl. ex Willd., (diffuse, spreading), JUBA’S-BUSH. Stems erect or
spreading, sometimes clambering over adjacent plants, 0.4–3 m long; male and female flowers
on the same plant; inflorescences white to straw-colored; tepals 1–1.5 mm long; seed broadly
obovoid or suborbicular, ca. 1.5 mm in diam. Often in sandy moist areas; Tarrant and
Williamson cos. (Reed 1969b); scattered in TX. Jul–Oct. [I. celosia L.]

Iresine rhizomatosa Standl., (very rooted), ROOTSTOCK BLOODLEAF, BLOODLEAF. Stems erect, 0.5–
1.5 m tall; male and female flowers on separate plants, bracts and tepals silvery white; tepals
1.2–1.5 mm long; urticle 2–2.5 mm long; seed suborbicular, ca. 0.5 mm in diam., dark red, lus-
trous. Sandy soils, often moist areas; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau.
Aug–Oct.

                                                 TIDESTROMIA
AA genus of 3 species of sw North America. (Named for Ivar T. Tidestrom, 1864–1956, Swed-
ish-born botanist of sw U.S.)

Tidestromia lanuginosa (Nutt.) Standl., (woolly), WOOLLY TIDESTROMIA, ESPANTA VAQUEROS. An-
nual herb to 15 cm tall and 1 m across; stems usually prostrate to rarely ascending; stems and
leaves gray-green to ashy-white, densely stellate-pubescent, glabrate with age; leaves opposite,
obovate to rhombic-ovate, entire, 5–20(–30) mm long; petioles as long as blades or shorter; flow-
ers in small axillary clusters, inconspicuous, yellowish, perfect; sepals 5, unequal, 1–3 mm long;
stamens 5; utricle subglobose. Dry sandy, gravelly, or rock areas; Archer, Callahan, and
Shackelford cos.; coastal, also extreme w part of nc TX w through w 1/2 of TX. Mar–Oct.


            ANACARDIACEAE SUMAC OR CASHEW FAMILY
Ours subshrubs, shrubs, small trees, or woody vines, often with somewhat milky juice; leaves
alternate, with 3 leaflets or once pinnately compound (simple in 1 species possibly present in
nc TX); leaflets entire, toothed, or lobed; flowers small, in terminal or lateral, head-like to loose
open panicles, perfect or unisexual, 5-merous; petals white to cream, yellow, or green; stamens 5;
pistil 1; fruit a drupe.
AA medium-sized (875 species in 70 genera) family of the tropics and subtropics with a few
temperate species. Economically important taxa include food plants such as Anacardium
occidentale L. (CASHEW), Mangifera indica L. (MANGO), and Pistacia vera L. (PISTACHIO), and or-
namentals including Cotinus (SMOKETREE), Rhus (SUMACS ), and Schinus (PEPPERTREE). 9 A
number of species cause contact dermatitis. Pistacia chinensis Bunge, (genus: Greek pistake,
pistachio; sp.: of China), CHINESE PISTACHIO, native from Afghanistan to China and the Philip-
pines, is widely planted in nc TX as an ornamental. It is a dioecious deciduous tree to 15(–25) m
tall with even-pinnately compound leaves (leaflets 10–20, 1.2–2 cm wide, oblique, acuminate,
entire), apetalous flowers, and small, reddish to purple, dry drupes 5–6 mm long in much-
branched panicles. In the spring of 1998, a number of seedlings were observed in a woods in
Fort Worth (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.). It is not clear whether they will survive and whether this
species will become naturalized. This small genus of 9 species includes the Old World P. vera L.,
                                                                                      COTINUS/ANACARDIACEAE 231

PISTACHIO, cultivated for the edible nuts; one species, P. texana Swingle, is native to sw TX. Family
name from Anacardium, a genus of 8 species of the New World tropics. (Greek: ana, up, and car-
dia, heart, possibly in reference to the large, swollen, fleshy, bright red or yellow, pear-like recep-
tacle above the nut; the receptacle is edible and referred to as the cashew apple) (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: subshrubs, shrubs, small trees, or woody vines with alternate
leaves that either have 3 leaflets or are pinnately compound (simple in 1 species possibly
present in nc TX); flowers small, inconspicuous; fruit a small, red or white to yellowish gray
drupe (light brown in 1 species possibly present in nc TX).
REFERENCES: Barkley 1957, 1961; Brizicky 1962d; Baer 1979.

1. Leaves simple; fruiting panicles with plumose sterile pedicels; styles lateral; fruits light brown;
   rare species of Edwards Plateau questionably present in nc TX                                                  Cotinus
1. Leaves compound with 3–numerous leaflets; fruiting panicles without plumose sterile pedicels;
   styles terminal; fruits red or white to yellowish gray; including species widespread in nc TX.
   2. Fruits red, noticeably pubescent with glandular and eglandular hairs; leaves pinnately com-
      pound with > 3 leaflets OR palmately 3-foliate (= terminal leaflet sessile); inflorescences termi-
      nal (or in R. aromatica and R. trilobata sometimes appearing axillary); plants without contact
      poisons                                                                                                       Rhus
   2. Fruits white to yellowish gray, glabrous or sparingly pubescent with eglandular hairs; leaves
      usually pinnately 3-foliate (= terminal leaflet stalked), rarely 5-foliate OR in 1 species rare in nc
      TX the leaves pinnately compound with 5–17 leaflets; inflorescences axillary; plants with con-
      tact poisons                                                                                         Toxicodendron


                              COTINUS SMOKETREE, SMOKEWOOD
AA genus of 3 species, 1 ranging from s Europe to China, 1 in sw China, and 1 in the se U.S. The
widespread Old World species, C. coggygriaScop. (WIGTREE, EUROPEAN SMOKETREE), is widely
cultivated and the wood yields a yellow dye; it can be distinguished from the native species by
its smaller (ca. 4–9 cm long), glabrous, often ovate leaf blades. The smoke-like effect of the plu-
mose fruiting pedicels gave rise to the common name. (Greek: cotinus, ancient name of the wild
olive, used by Pliny for an unidentified shrub of the Apennines, but applied by some pre-Lin-
nean botanists, such as Tournefort, to C. coggygria—Brizicky 1962d)

Cotinus obovatus Raf., (obovate, inversely ovate), AMERICAN SMOKETREE , SMOKEBUSH ,
CHITTAMWOOD. Usually dioecious, shrub or small tree to ca. 12 m tall with strong-smelling sap;
wood yellow; leaves simple; leaf blades obovate to elliptic-obovate, 6–17 cm long, 5–9 cm wide,
strikingly yellow to orange, red, or scarlet in fall, apically usually obtuse, with lower surface
pubescent; petioles 1.5–6 cm long, often purple or reddish; flowers small, numerous, yellowish
white to greenish yellow, in terminal panicles ca. 10 cm long which can enlarge to ca. 30 cm in
fruit; sterile pedicels plumose with pale purplish or brownish hairs (panicles thus with a pink
“smoky” appearance but not as showy as in the introduced C. coggygria); fruits flattened, kid-
ney-shaped or oblique-oblong, ca. 4 mm long. Rocky woods, limestone outcrops; Cox and Leslie
(1991) reported and mapped this species for nc TX; however, we have found no nc TX specimens
or other literature reports and its presence in nc TX is questionable; mainly Edwards Plateau
(Bandera, Kendall, Kerr, and Uvalde cos.—Stanford 1976; Simpson 1988). Apr–May. [C.
americanus Nutt., Rhus cotinoides Nutt.] According to Simpson (1988), the TX occurrence of
this tree is relictual with the TX populations more than 500 miles from the nearest locality in
OK; the species has an extremely limited and scattered distribution in the e U.S. (Little 1970)
and its distribution is considered relictual (Little 1983). The wood yields a yellow dye which
was extensively used during the Civil War (Cox & Leslie 1991). The striking fall foliage suggests
more widespread use as an ornamental.
232 ANACARDIACEAE/RHUS

                                                 RHUS SUMAC
Shrubs or rarely small trees often forming thickets; leaves palmately 3-foliate or pinnately com-
pound, often turning bright red in fall.
AA genus of ca. 200 species of temperate and warm areas; Toxicodendron, recognized here as a
separate genus, is sometimes lumped into Rhus as a section or subgenus. According to J.
Hennen (pers. comm.), there are rust fungi that attack only Toxicodendron (Pileolaria brevipes
Berk. & Ravenel) and others that attack only Rhus (Pileolaria patzcuarensis (Holw.) Arthur).
Rhus species often display very early fall foliage color (often strikingly red); this is considered to
serve as a “foliar fruit flag” which attracts birds that act as dispersal agents for the fall-ripening
fruits (Stiles 1984). In contrast to Rhus species, which are all non-poisonous, Toxicodendron
species are poisonous and can cause contact dermatitis. Some species are a source of tannin.
(Ancient Greek and Latin name for SUMAC)
REFERENCES: Barkley 1937; Brizicky 1963a.

1. Leaves palmately compound; leaflets 3.
   2. Terminal leaflet 25–60 mm long, ± narrowed and often pointed at apex; leaflets usually pu-
      bescent below, the margins usually ciliate                                                           R. aromatica
                                                                                                                      a
   2. Terminal leaflet 15–33 mm long (rarely larger), abruptly narrowed to truncate at apex; leaflets
      usually glabrous below (or minutely puberulent when young), the margins not usually ciliate
                                                                                                             R. trilobata
1. Leaves pinnately compound; leaflets 5 or more.
   3. Leaves with rachis completely unwinged and leaflets entire, 4–12 cm long              see Toxicodendron vernix
   3. Leaves with rachis winged OR leaflets toothed OR leaflets 4 cm or less long.
      4. Leaflets (3–)5–9, very small, < 2 cm long and < 6 mm wide; branches often ± spinescent
                                                                                                         R. microphylla
      4. Leaflets 5–31, much > 2 cm long and usually much > 6 mm wide; branches not spinescent.
         5. Leaf rachis unwinged; leaflets sharply toothed or entire.
            6. Leaves deciduous, not coriaceous; leaflets mostly sharply and conspicuously toothed,
               glabrous and glaucous beneath, to 12 cm long                                                     R. glabraa
            6. Leaves evergreen, coriaceous; leaflets entire, pubescent beneath, soft to the touch, 4
               cm or less long                                                                                   R. virens
         5. Leaf rachis winged; leaflets mostly entire.
            7. Rachis and its wings on some leaves over 4 mm wide (total distance across rachis and
               its wings); leaflets 7–17, ovate-lanceolate, 2–4 times as long as wide, scarcely falcate
                                                                                                          R. copallinum
            7. Rachis and its wings usually less than 3.5 mm wide; leaflets 13–19, linear-lanceolate, 4–
               9 times as long as wide, usually strongly falcate                                          R. lanceolata

Rhus aromatica Aiton var. serotina (Greene) Rehder, (sp.: fragrant; var.: late-flowering or -ripen-
ing), FRAGRANT SUMAC. Shrub to ca. 2 m tall with creeping stem-bases, forming loose clumps;
foliage fragrant when bruised; flowers in terminal, head-like or irregular, dense clusters; petals
yellow; flowering before leaves appear or with unfolding leaves. Sandy woods and ravines; se
and e TX w to Dallas and Grayson cos., also Edwards Plateau. Mar.

Rhus copallinum L. var. latifolia Engl., (sp.: gummy, resinous; var.: broad-leaved), WING-RIB
SUMAC, FLAME-LEAF SUMAC, DWARF SUMAC, SHINING SUMAC. Shrub or small tree to 1.5–3(–10) m
tall; leaflets soft-pubescent to nearly glabrous beneath; flowers in dense, subsessile, pyramidal
panicles. Sandy woods, hills, and open areas; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also Coryell
Co. in Lampasas Cut Plain (Little 1976 [1977]). Jun–Jul. We are following Jones et al. (1997) and J.
Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in treating all TX examples of this species as var. latifolia. According
                                                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 233




Gossypianthus lanuginosus var. lanuginosus [SID]
                                                                         Gossypianthus lanuginosus var. tenuiflorus [IPL]


                          TEPAL
                  ?


                                                                                MATURE FRUIT


     MATURE FRUIT




                                                       TEPAL OF
                                ?                     /FLOWER                                           Tidestromia lanuginosa [RYD]
        Iresine diffusa [JAA]                        Iresine rhizomatosa [JAA, RAD]




            ?



                                    /




                                                            FRUITING
                                                                                                        Rhus aromatica [BB1]
                                                            BRANCH

                                  Cotinus obovatus [SA3]
234 ANACARDIACEAE/TOXICODENDRON

to Crosswhite (1980), before lemons were readily available, the small fruits of R. copallinum
were crushed in water to make a tart drink called sumac-ade.

Rhus glabra L., (glabrous, smooth, hairless), SMOOTH SUMAC, SCARLET SUMAC. Tree-shaped shrub
(rarely a small tree) to ca. 3 m tall, the leaves and few branches crowded toward summit of
stem; leaflets 9–23, short-oblong to narrowly lanceolate, glabrous, glaucous beneath; flowers in
dense, subsessile, pyramidal panicles. Sandy or rocky soils, hillside woods, stream banks, and
fencerows; e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. May.

Rhus lanceolata (A. Gray) Britton, (lanceolate, lance-shaped), PRAIRIE SUMAC, PRAIRIE FLAME-
LEAF SUMAC. Large shrub or small tree to 10 m tall; leaflets usually glabrous, narrow; flowers in
dense, subsessile, pyramidal panicles. On limestone; Hood and McLennan cos., also Brown,
Coryell, Hamilton, and Mills cos. (HPC), also Dallas, Palo Pinto, Parker, and Tarrant cos. s to the
Edwards Plateau (Little 1976); mainly c and w parts of nc TX and Edwards Plateau; scattered
elsewhere in the state. Jul–Aug. [R. copallinum L. var. lanceolata A. Gray]

Rhus microphylla Engelm. ex A. Gray, (small-leaved), LITTLE-LEAF SUMAC, DESERT SUMAC, SCRUB
SUMAC, SMALL-LEAF SUMAC, CORREOSA SODA-POP-BUSH. Much-branched, shrub (rarely a small
tree) to ca. 5 m tall (usually much smaller); leaflets sessile, pilose; rachis winged; flowers ap-
pearing before (rarely with) the leaves. Dry open areas; Brown and Clay cos. (Little 1976); w part
of nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr(–May). According to Crosswhite (1980), before lemons were
readily available, the small fruits were crushed in water to make a tart drink called sumac-ade.

Rhus trilobata Nutt., (three-lobed), SKUNKBUSH. Similar to R. aromatica; usually flowering before
leaves appear or with unfolding leaves. Limestone outcrops, rocky slopes, prairies, fencerows,
woods margins, and sandy woods; Blackland Prairie and Edwards Plateau w to w TX. This
taxon is distinguished in some instances with difficulty from R. aromatica and is possibly only
a variety of that species. [R. aromatica Aiton var. flabelliformis Shinners]

Rhus virens Lindh. ex A. Gray, (green), EVERGREEN SUMAC, TOBACCO SUMAC, LENTISCO. Shrub or
small tree to 3 m or more tall; leaflets 4 cm or less long, 2 cm or less wide. Limestone bluffs
overlooking the Brazos River, Johnson Co., otherwise known in nc TX only from Bell, Coryell
(J. Stanford, pers. comm. and Sanchez 1997), and Brown (Stanford 1976) cos.; mainly Edwards
Plateau w to Trans-Pecos. Aug–Oct. The Johnson Co. record is well to the n of any other known
localities of this species.

                    TOXICODENDRON POISON-OAK, POISON-IVY
Poisonous woody vines, shrubs, subshrubs, or small trees; leaves pinnately 3-foliate or pinnately
compound, often turning bright red in fall.
AA genus of 15+ species of North and South America and e Asia; often included in the genus
Rhus but rather clearly distinguished (Barkley 1937; Gillis 1971). 9 These species are toxic,
causing severe allergic contact dermatitis in some individuals. Physical contact with any part
of the plant, exposure to fumes/smoke from burning plants, or contact with pets having
touched the plants are common means of exposure. Following a latent period of 12–24+ hours
after exposure, there is reddening of the skin, sometimes accompanied by edematous swelling.
This can be followed by the formation of fluid-filled blisters; this fluid cannot spread the der-
matitis. Instead, additional spread is from unwashed skin, clothing, or other objects (Lampe
1986). Eating the leaves can result in an internal reaction occasionally known to be fatal (Gillis
1975). According to Gillis (1975), “The poisons may be effective for an indefinite period of time
in causing dermatitis. Several hundred year-old herbarium specimens have been known to af-
fect a sensitive person who has handled them!” These reactions are caused by resinous phenolic
compounds commonly known as urushiols (chemically pentadecylcatechols). Because the
                                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 235




                        Rhus copallinum [SA3]                                               Rhus glabra [REE]




Rhus lanceolata [SA3]                            Rhus microphylla [POW]                    Rhus trilobata [BB1]




                        Rhus virens [LYN, POW]                                        Toxicodendron pubescens [REE]
236 ANACARDIACEAE/TOXICODENDRON

compounds are insoluble in water, washing with a strong soap as soon as possible after contact
is recommended. Gillis (1975) and Frankel (1991) discussed Toxicodendron dermatitis. Gillis
(1975) also gave several citations documenting the use of POISON-IVY in Native American arrow
poisons. The sap of an Asian species, T. vernicifluum (Stokes) F.A. Barkley (ORIENTAL LACQUER
TREE), is a major source of lacquer; furniture treated with the lacquer can cause dermatitis in
sensitive individuals. Toxicodendron species, like those in the genus Rhus, often display very
early fall foliage color (often strikingly red); this is considered to serve as a “foliar fruit flag”
which attracts birds that act as dispersal agents for the fall-ripening fruits (Stiles 1984). (Latin:
toxicum, poison, and Greek: dendron, tree)
REFERENCES: McNair 1925; Barkley 1937; Brizicky 1963a; Gillis 1971, 1975; Brooks 1977; Baer 1979;
Reveal 1990b.

1. Leaflets 5–17; large shrub or small tree; usually in swamps or wet areas; mainly e TX                      T. vernix
1. Leaflets usually 3(–5); vines, subshrubs, or shrubs; usually in habitats of moderate to dry moisture
   conditions; extremely abundant in nc TX.
   2. Leaflets often with broad, blunt apex, sometimes with narrowed apex; leaflets entire or with
      usually shallow rounded lobes or broad blunt teeth (can be deeply lobed), pubescent under-
      neath; fruits pubescent or papillose; plants not climbing                                           T. pubescens
   2. Leaflets with narrowed apex; usually some leaflets deeply lobed or sharply toothed, glabrous
      or pubescent underneath; fruits glabrous (or with occasional hairs); plants varying from not
      climbing to high-climbing                                                                             T. radicans

Toxicodendron pubescens Mill., (pubescent, downy), EASTERN POISON-OAK. Low, creeping shrub
or subshrub; leaflet lobes usually shallow but sometimes ± deep. Sandy woods; Montague Co.,
also Dallas, Grayson, Lamar, and Tarrant cos. (Gillis 1971); widespread in TX. [Rhus toxicarium
Salisb., Rhus toxicodendronL.] Apr–May. Jones et al. (1997) treated this taxon as [T. diversilobum
(Torr. & A. Gray) Greene var. pubescensMill.]. Causes contact dermatitis. 9

Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze, (rooting), POISON-OAK, POISON-IVY, HIEDRA. Low, creeping
shrub with aerial roots to erect shrub or low- to high-climbing vine. In a variety of habitats
from low woods to forest margins and disturbed areas. Mid-Apr–May(–later). The subspecies of
T. radicans seem to overlap morphologically and are often difficult to distinguish. In addition
to the subspecies below, Hatch et al. (1990) cited subsp. eximum (Greene) Gillis for vegetational
area 5 (Fig. 2) and subsp. radicans for vegetational areas 4 and 5. We have seen no material for
nc TX and according to Gillis (1971), these subspecies do not occur in nc TX. Reveal (1990b) be-
lieved the variation within this species is better treated at the varietal rank than the subspecific.
Causes contact dermatitis. 9

1. Leaflets usually clearly and sharply lobed or with deeply cut margins                        subsp. verrucosum
1. Leaflets with entire, undulate, notched, or serrate margins.
   2. Leaflets usually glabrous or with sparse pubescence both below and above, the pubescence,
      if any, appressed; terminal leaflet usually ovate to elliptic                                 subsp. negundo
   2. Leaflets with pubescence on lower leaf surfaces, often pilose, velvety, the pubescence erect;
      upper leaf surface usually pubescent; terminal leaflet broadly ovate                           subsp. pubens

subsp. negundo (Greene) Gillis, (the native name of Vitex negundo), POISON-IVY. Hunt Co., also
Cooke, Dallas, and Kaufman cos. (Gillis 1971); se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and e Edwards
Plateau. [T. radicans var. negundo (Greene) Reveal]

subsp. pubens (Engelm. ex S. Watson) Gillis, (downy), POISON-IVY. Cooke and Dallas cos.; se and e
TX w to nc TX and e Edwards Plateau.

subsp. verrucosum (Scheele) Gillis, (verrucose, warted), POISON-IVY. Bosque, Dallas, Hill, Johnson,
                                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   237




Toxicodendron radicans subsp. pubens [LYN]                           Toxicodendron radicans subsp. verrucosum [LYN]




                                                   Toxicodendron vernix [SA3]




                           Asimina triloba [SA3]                                                     Ammi majus [BR2]
238   ANNONACEAE/ASIMINA

McLennan, Palo Pinto, and Tarrant cos., also Grayson Co. (Gillis 1971); se and e TX w to nc TX
and Edwards Plateau.

Toxicodendron vernix (L.) Kuntze, (varnish), POISON SUMAC, POISON-ELDER, POISON -DOGWOOD.
Branchlets glabrous; leaflets 4–12 cm long, 2–5 cm wide, entire; flowers in axillary panicles,
greenish. Swamps or wet areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by
Hatch et al. (1990); mainly e TX. Apr–Jun. [Rhus vernix L.] Vegetatively this species resembles
many non-toxic Rhus species. It can, however, be easily distinguished by its leaves having entire
leaflets and lacking any wing along the rachis; all nc TX Rhus species with pinnately com-
pound leaves have either toothed leaflets or a winged rachis or in the case of the locally rare R.
virens, small leaflets 4 cm or less long. This species causes contact dermatitis. 9


      ANNONACEAE CUSTARD-APPLE OR ANNONA FAMILY
AThe Annonaceae is a large family of ca. 2,150 species in 112 genera (Kral 1997); it is mainly in
tropical areas with Asimina extending n to Michigan. The family consists of aromatic (due to
ethereal oils) trees, shrubs, and lianas, usually with alkaloids, and with 3-merous flowers (un-
usual among dicots); they share with the related Magnoliaceae a number of unspecialized
flower characters such as numerous free stamens and carpels, laminar stamens, and
monocolpate pollen. Many are important economically with tropical species variously used
medicinally or for perfumes or cosmetics (Baumgardt 1982); a number are valued for their ed-
ible fruits including Annona species (e.g., CUSTARD-APPLE, CHERIMOYA, SOURSOP , and SWEETSOP).
Family name from Annona, a genus of ca. 100 species of tropical America and Africa. (Name
either from Haitian, anon, the native name for the widely cultivated A. reticulata L.—custard-
apple, or from Latin: annona, yearly produce, crop, grain, food) (subclass Magnoliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is a large shrub or tree with large,
alternate, entire leaves, hairy naked buds, 3-merous flowers, and large banana-like fruits.
REFERENCES: Wood 1958; Kessler 1993a; Kral 1997.

                              ASIMINA AMERICAN PAWPAW
AAn e U.S. genus of 8 species; this is one of only 11 genera of trees endemic to the e U.S. (only
three of these, Asimina, Maclura , and Taxodium, occur in nc TX) (Little 1983). It is also the
northernmost and only extra-tropical genus of a large and otherwise tropical family (Little
1970). (Name through asiminier of the French colonists, from the Native American name,
assimin)
REFERENCES: Nash 1896; Kral 1960a; Wilbur 1970.

Asimina triloba (L.) Dunal, (three-lobed), PAWPAW, COMMON PAWPAW. Large shrub or tree to 12 m
tall; young twigs rusty pubescent; buds naked (= without scales) but protected by pubescence;
leaves alternate; leaf blades obovate to elliptic-ovate, to 25(–30) cm long and 7(–15) cm wide,
apically abruptly acuminate, basally cuneate, marginally entire; petioles 5–10 mm long; sepals
3; petals dull purple, 6, in 2 series, the inner and outer series very unequal; stamens numerous in
a mass; carpels 3–15, separate; ovaries superior; fruits to 12 cm long, 3–4 cm thick, green to dark
brown when ripe (in fall), the flesh sweet and edible; seeds somewhat flattened, 1.5–2 cm long.
Rich woods and banks of streams; Grayson Co. along the Red River near the mouth of Pawpaw
Creek; with the exception of the Grayson collection, this species is known in the state only
from extreme ne TX. Apr–May. The fruits are edible (and delicious) but can cause gastrointesti-
nal problems for some; the seeds are reported to contain a toxic alkaloid; the plant causes con-
tact dermatitis in a small percentage of people (Peattie 1948; Kingsbury 1964). 9
                                                                                                        APIACEAE   239


                              APIACEAE (UMBELLIFERAE)
                              CARROT OR PARSLEY FAMILY
Annual or perennial herbs; leaves basal, alternate, or (in Bowlesia) opposite; petioles in nearly
all species with enlarged, clasping base; leaf blades simple or compound, entire, toothed, lobed,
or finely dissected; flowers axillary or terminal, small, in umbels (varying from loose and open
to compact and head-like) or whorls; calyx tube cylindrical to shallowly cup-like, with entire
or 5-toothed summit; petals 5, attached at summit of calyx tube, equal or occasionally unequal;
stamens 5, attached around a fleshy disk; pistil 2-carpellate; ovary inferior; styles and stigmas 2;
fruit a schizocarp that splits into 2 one-seeded segments.
AA large (3,540 species in 446 genera), nearly cosmopolitan but more commonly n temperate
and tropical mountain family of mainly herbs or less commonly shrubs or even trees. The fam-
ily yields many important spices and foods including Anethum (DILL), Apium (CELERY), Carum
(CARAWAY), Coriandrum ( CORIANDER, CILANTRO), Cuminum ( CUMIN ), Daucus ( CARROT ),
Foeniculum (FENNEL), Pastinaca (PARSNIP), Petroselinum (PARSLEY), and Pimpinella (ANISE); 9 it
also includes some extremely poisonous plants. To avoid possibly fatal poisoning, no wild
member of the family should be eaten without absolute certainty of identification. Many spe-
cies of Apiaceae are used as food by caterpillars of the black swallowtail butterfly (Papilio
polyxenes); numerous native species (Berula erecta, Cicuta maculata, Cryptotaenia canadensis,
Osmorhiza longistylis, Polytaenia nuttallii, Ptilimnium capillaceum, Sium suave, Spermolepis
divaricata, and Zizia aurea ) are utilized as well as introduced taxa (DILL, FENNEL , PARSLEY,
QUEEN - ANNE ’ S - LACE , POISON - HEMLOCK ). Apiaceae typically produce toxic psoralins
(furanocoumarins) to protect themselves from herbivore damage; however, black swallowtail
larvae are resistant and actually grow faster in the presence of the chemicals (Scott 1986; Tveten
& Tveten 1993). The Apiaceae are closely related to the Araliaceae and appear to be a polyphyl-
etic group derived from within a paraphyletic Araliaceae. From a cladistic standpoint the two
families should be lumped to form a more inclusive monophyletic family, which based on no-
menclatural rules should be called Apiaceae (Judd et al. 1994). Tauschia texana A. Gray, an
acaulescent perennial with yellow flowers, oval fruits 3–4 mm long, and the seed face deeply
sulcate, is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2); it apparently occurs well to
the s of nc TX. Family name from Apium, a temperate genus of 20 species including A.
graveolens L., CELERY, valued for its edible petioles and fruits (celery “seed”). (Classical Latin
name for celery and parsnip) (Rosidae)
FAMILIY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: often aromatic herbs with small, frequently white to green,
yellow, or pink flowers usually in umbels; leaves alternate and often pinnately compound,
sometimes finely dissected, with sheathing petioles; internodes hollow; fruits small, splitting
into 2 one-seeded parts.
REFERENCES: Coulter & Rose 1900; Mathias & Constance 1944–1945, 1961; Mathias 1965; Hiroe
1979; Pimenov & Leonov 1993; Judd et al. 1994; Plunkett et al. 1996 [1997].

1. Leaves simple or apparently so; leaf blades round to reniform, ovate, lanceolate, or linear, either
   unlobed OR palmately divided 2/3 to base or less, with few, wide lobes.
   2. Leaves reduced to elongate, filiform or linear, entire, hollow, septate phyllodes, the upper bract-
      like, normal blade tissue absent (leaves rush-like in appearance)                                      Oxypolis
   2. Leaves with normal blade tissue.
      3. Leaves perfoliate (= completely surrounding the stem)                                              Bupleurum
      3. Leaves not perfoliate.
         4. Leaf blades (at least upper) linear to oblong-lanceolate; flowers sessile, numerous, in very
             dense, ovoid to globose, whitish to bluish heads 5–25 mm in diam.                               Eryngium
         4. Leaf blades round to reniform, broadly ovate, or ovate; flowers not arranged as above.
240    APIACEAE

           5. Inflorescences usually long-peduncled; plants glabrous or with simple pubescence;
              stipules absent; leaf blades peltate OR not so; leaves basal or solitary at the nodes;
              creeping perennials, rhizomatous or stems rooting at the nodes.
              6. Involucre subtending inflorescence much reduced or absent; leaf blades round to
                 reniform, either peltate OR lobed to about the middle; petioles not sheathing;
                 wide-spread in nc TX                                                                         Hydrocotyle
              6. Involucre of 2 conspicuous ovate to suborbicular bracts 2–4 mm long; leaf blades
                 ovate to broadly ovate, neither peltate nor lobed; petioles sheathing; rare in nc TX
                                                                                                                 Centella
            5. Inflorescences sessile or nearly so; plants with ± gray, stellate pubescence; stipules
               present, scarious, lacerate; leaf blades not peltate; leaves opposite; prostrate to suberect
               annuals from slender taproot                                                                      Bowlesia
1. Leaves compound or at least the largest deeply lobed; leaf blades triangular-ovate to lanceolate
   or linear in outline.
   7. Inflorescence a dense “head,” globose to elongated and usually with spiny leaves exserted
      apically                                                                                                  Eryngium
   7. Inflorescence open, loose, not dense, without spiny leaves exserted apically.
      8. Ovaries and fruits bristly or prickly.
         9. Leaves palmately compound with 3–5 leaflets, the leaflets toothed and lanceolate, the
            largest > 1 cm wide, usually much wider                                                              Sanicula
         9. Leaves pinnately compound or decompound, with numerous segments; ultimate leaf
            segments < 1 cm wide, often much less.
            10. Umbels with simple, entire basal bracts or bracts absent.
                11. Segments of upper leaves narrowly linear or thread-like; plants glabrous; mature
                     fruits 1.5–2 mm long                                                                     Spermolepis
                11. Segments of upper leaves lanceolate; plants hispid; mature fruits 3–5 mm long
                                                                                                                   Torilis
           10. Umbels with toothed or lobed basal bracts                                                          Daucus
      8. Ovaries and fruits glabrous or pubescent, but neither bristly nor prickly.
         12. Petals yellow or green.
             13. Leaves all basal                                                                               Lomatium
             13. Leaves distributed up the stem.
                 14. Ultimate leaf segments long and thread-like (< 0.5 mm wide); bracts absent
                     below both umbels and umbellets (= secondary or ultimate umbels); plants
                     with strong anise or dill odor.
                     15. Plants with strong anise odor; mature fruits with the lateral ribs wingless, all
                          the ribs ± the same in appearance                                                     Anethum
                     15. Plants with strong dill odor; mature fruits with lateral ribs winged, distinctly
                          different from other ribs                                                           Foeniculum
                 14. Ultimate leaf segments not long and thread-like (> 1 mm wide, often much
                     greater); bracts absent below umbels but present below umbellets (sometimes
                     inconspicuous); plants without strong anise or dill odor.
                     16. Ultimate segments of upper leaves sharply toothed around the margins,
                          not lobed; fruits 2–4 mm long                                                             Zizia
                     16. Ultimate segments of upper leaves toothed at apex or entire, conspicu-
                          ously lobed; fruits 2–11 mm long.
                          17. Leaves divided into numerous segments, but not parsley-like in appear-
                               ance (the segments too large), the ultimate segments or their lobes
                               often > 5 mm wide; small calyx teeth present; fruits 5–11 mm long, 4–7
                               mm wide; widespread native species                                              Polytaenia
                                                                                               APIACEAE     241

                  17. Leaves parsley-like in appearance, the ultimate segments or their lobes
                      usually < 5 mm wide; calyx teeth absent; fruits 2–4 mm long, 1.5–3 mm
                      wide; rarely escaped introduced cultivar                                       Petroselinum
12. Petals white, pink, or lavender.
    18. Fruits linear with long differentiated beak 20–70 mm long; ovary pubescent                        Scandix
    18. Fruits beakless or nearly so; ovary pubescent OR glabrous.
        19. Pedicels 0.3–2 times as long as the ovary when petals have expanded (up to 3
            times in fruit).
            20. Umbels small, simple or compound with 2–5 rays (= main branches of umbel).
                  21. Small bracts below umbellets linear or narrowly lanceolate, acute OR
                      small bracts absent.
                      22. Segments of middle and upper leaves obtuse or subacute; plants
                          2–30 cm tall, branching from base; fruits 2.5–6 mm long                   Ammoselinum
                      22. Segments of middle and upper leaves sharply acute; plants 20–90
                          cm tall, branching in upper part; fruits 8–10 mm long                       Trepocarpus
                  21. Small bracts below umbellets oblong-elliptic, obtuse or subacute
                                                                                                  Chaerophyllum
            20. Umbels large, compound with 14–17 rays                                                  Daucosma
        19. Pedicels 2–many times as long as the ovary when petals have expanded.
            23. Umbels mostly lateral or axillary and short-peduncled; fruits ovoid, 1–2(–3)
                  mm long                                                                          Cyclospermum
            23. Umbels mostly or all terminal, short- or long-peduncled; fruits various.
                  24. Small bracts below umbellets oblong-elliptic, obtuse, scarious; flowers
                      pinkish; fruits broadly winged; leaves mostly near base of plant                Cymopterus
                  24. Small bracts below umbellets absent OR slender, acute, not scarious;
                      flowers various; fruits winged OR not winged; leaves along stem and/
                      or basal.
                      25. Upper leaves with lanceolate or oblanceolate, usually toothed seg-
                          ments or leaflets.
                          26. Umbels with 2–8 primary rays; ovary elongating, the fruit elon-
                               gate subcylindrical.
                               27. Leaves mostly once compound; small bracts below
                                    umbellets linear-lan ceolate, erect, inconspicuous; pedicels
                                    very unequal                                                     Cryptotaenia
                               27. Leaves 2–3 times compound; small bracts below umbellets
                                    lanceolate, reflexed, prominent; pedicels about equal
                                                                                                        Osmorhiza
                          26. Umbels with many (6–30+) primary rays; ovary remaining short,
                               the fruit subglobose.
                               28. Leaf blades much-dissected, almost parsley-like in appear-
                                    ance; small bracts below umbellets ovate-lanceolate with
                                    wide clasping base, abruptly tapered to ± narrow tips                 Conium
                               28. Leaf blades 1–3 times pinnately compound but not much-
                                    dissected, not at all parsley-like in appearance; small bracts
                                    below umbellets linear to lanceolate, scarcely if at all clasp-
                                    ing, not abruptly tapered.
                                    29. Leaf blades 1–3 times pinnately compound, the lateral
                                         leaflets or lateral leaf segments with distinct stalks;
                                         widespread in nc TX.
242   APIACEAE

                                  30. Involucres subtending main umbels absent OR of
                                       1–4 entire, inconspicuous bracts; ribs of fruit promi-
                                       nent, corky, obtuse, covering half or more of the
                                       fruitsurface                                                Cicuta
                                  30. Involucres subtending main umbels of numerous
                                       usually pinnately divided bracts with filiform seg-
                                       ments; ribs of fruit narrow, acute, covering much
                                       less than half of the fruit surface                         Ammi
                             29. Leaf blades once pinnately compound (but leaflets can
                                  be deeply lobed), the lateral leaflets sessile or nearly
                                  so; rare in nc TX.
                                  31. Leaflets not only toothed but also some often
                                       deeply lobed; fruits 1.5–2 mm long, with ribs ob-
                                       scure                                                       Berula
                                  31. Leaflets finely to coarsely toothed (rarely entire), but
                                       not lobed; fruits 2–7 mm long, with ribs prominent.
                                       32. Leaflets often coarsely toothed (teeth to 4 mm
                                            or more tall); fruits 4–8 mm long; stems not
                                            conspicuously corrugated                             Oxypolis
                                       32. Leaflets finely toothed (teeth < 1 mm tall);
                                            fruits2–3 mm long; stems conspicuously cor-
                                            rugated                                                  Sium
                 25. Upper leaves with thread-like to linear-lanceolate, mostly entire
                     segments OR some leaves undivided, slender, entire.
                     33. Leaves once compound (some can be simple), with linear-lan-
                         ceolate, entire lobes or leaflets.
                         34. Stem leaves palmately compound; fruits with a small beak
                                                                                               Cynosciadium
                         34. Stem leaves pinnately compound or pinnatifid OR some
                             simple and entire; fruits beakless                              Limnosciadium
                     33. Leaves 1–3 times compound, the upper with linear-lanceolate
                         to thread-like segments.
                         35. Petals obtuse or subacute (a few sometimes bilobed), ob-
                             long or elliptic, longer than wide; fruits neither constricted
                             into 2 parts nor conspicuously flattened.
                             36. Petals 0.5–1.3 mm long, white; fruits minutely tubercu-
                                 late to smooth, 1.5–2 mm in diam.; native species wide
                                 spread in nc TX                                                Spermolepis
                             36. Petals (of outer flowers in umbels) 2.2–4 mm long,
                                 white, often tinged pink or lavender; fruits smooth,
                                 (1.5)2.5–3(–5) mm in diam; introduced cultivated spe-
                                 cies rarely escaped in nc TX                                   Coriandrum
                         35. Petals with indented or notched apex, obovate or subor-
                             bicular, shorter to slightly longer than wide; fruits constricted
                             into 2 parts OR conspicuously flattened OR neither.
                             37. Segments of middle and lower leaves linear-lanceolate
                                 to thread-like, entire or nearly so; fruits not conspicu-
                                 ously flattened.
                                 38. Petals (of outer flowers in umbels) 0.5–1 mm long;
                                       fruits not constricted into 2 parts; calyx tube of
                                                                                            AMMI/APIACEAE     243

                                               outer flowers cup-shaped, slightly shorter to much
                                               longer than its lobes or teeth                         Ptilimnium
                                           38. Petals (of outer flowers in umbels) 1.6–2.1 mm long;
                                               fruits conspicuously constricted into 2 parts; calyx
                                               tube of outer flowers sub-rotate, much shorter than
                                               its lobes                                                   Bifora
                                                                                                                a
                                       37. Segments of middle and lower leaves lanceolate,
                                           sharply toothed; fruits conspicuously flattened            Eurytaenia


                                        AMMI BISHOP’S-WEED
AAn Old World genus of 3–4 species; A. visnaga (L.) Lam. has been cultivated since the time of
the Assyrians for medical uses, especially in treating angina and asthma. (ancient Greek name)

Ammi majus L., (bigger, larger), GREATER AMMI, BISHOP’S-WEED. Erect, glabrous, branching annual
0.2–0.8 m tall; superficially resembling Cicuta; leaves ternately or pinnately compound or de-
compound, the ultimate segments narrowly lanceolate, serrate; inflorescences of compound
umbels; involucral bracts numerous, usually pinnately divided, the segments filiform; rays 50–
60; flowers white; fruits oblong, 1.5–2 mm long, 1 mm or less wide, the ribs narrow, acute, cover-
ing much less than half of the fruit surface. Waste areas, roadsides; Limestone and Tarrant cos.,
also Hamilton Co. (Stanford 1971); se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun. Na-
tive of the Mediterranean. Cultivated for the cut-flower trade (Mabberley 1987). I

                                 AMMOSELINUM SAND-PARSLEY
Glabrous small annuals branching from base; leaves ternately or ternate-pinnately decom-
pound, the ultimate segments linear to spatulate; flowers inconspicuous, white, in small com-
pound umbels; fruit with prominent ribs.
AA genus of 3 species of the North America and temperate South America. (Greek: ammo,
sand, and selinum, parsley, presumably from the habitat)

1. Umbels in the axils of stem leaves, ± sessile; fruits 2.5–3 mm long, 1–1.5 mm wide; plants 4–5
   (–12) cm tall                                                                                        A. butlerii
1. Umbels axillary or seemingly terminal, on peduncles (0.5–)1.5–4 cm long; fruits 3–6 mm long, to
   ca. 3 mm wide; plants 10–35 cm tall                                                                   A. popei

Ammoselinum butleri (Engelm. ex S. Watson) J.M. Coult. & Rose, (for George Dexter Butler,
1850–1910, lawyer, teacher, botanist, correspondent of George Engelmann, and one of the early
collectors of this species), BUTLER’S SAND-PARSLEY. Fruits ovoid. Sandy or disturbed ground, fairly
common but inconspicuous and overlooked; se and e TX w to e Rolling Plains and Edwards
Plateau. Mar–Apr.

Ammoselinum popei Torr. & A. Gray, (for Clara Maria Pope, active 1760s–1838, British flower
painter), PLAINS SAND-PARSLEY. Fruits oblong-ovoid. Sandy or gravelly ground; Grand Prairie s
and w to w TX. Mar–May.

                                             ANETHUM DILL
AA monotypic genus of sw Asia. (From Anethon, ancient Greek name of dill, thought to come
from aithein , blaze, in allusion to the pungent seeds)

Anethum graveolens L., (heavy-scented), DILL. Glabrous, strong-scented annual, 0.5–1.5 m tall;
leaves pinnately decompound; rays 25 or more; petals yellow; fruits 3–4 mm long; similar to
Foeniculum and reported to hybridize with it. Widely cultivated in TX and reseeds in open
244   APIACEAE/BERULA

ground; Grayson Co. May–Summer. Native of sw Asia. This species has been cultivated since at
least 400 BC.; the leaves and fruits are widely used in pickling and as a flavoring (Mabberley
1987). Duke (1985) indicated that insects exposed to the insecticide parathion alone suffered
only 8% mortality; those exposed to the same doses of parathion plus d-carvone or other DILL
components showed 99% mortality; he raised the question of whether certain naturally occur-
ring plant products can synergistically react with pesticides to produce harmful effects in
humans. 9 I

                                BERULA WATER-PARSNIP
AA monotypic genus of wet areas of the n temperate zone and e and s Africa. (Latin name of
some aquatic plant)

Berula erecta (Huds.) Coville, (erect, upright), STALKY BERULA, WATER-PARSNIP. Erect or reclining,
glabrous perennial; stems 0.2–1 m tall; leaves once pinnately compound; leaflets toothed to
deeply lobed; small bracts below umbellets linear to lanceolate; flowers white; calyx teeth
minute, subulate; fruits oval to orbicular, 1.5–2 mm long. Wet areas; included based on citation
of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); also Edwards Plateau, Plains Country, and
Trans-Pecos. May–Nov. Reported to be extremely poisonous and capable of causing death in
cattle (Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977). 9

                                           BIFORA
A A genus of 3 species of the Mediterranean to c Asia and North America; resembles
Ptilimnium. (Possibly from Latin: bi, two, in reference to the two-parted fruit )

Bifora americana Benth. & Hook. f. ex S. Watson, (of America), PRAIRIE-BISHOP. Low, glabrous
annual 25–75 cm tall; leaves ternate-pinnately decompound; flowers white; fruits subglobose
and didymous, 2–3 mm long, 4–5 mm wide, the two nearly spherical segments separating from
one another at maturity. Prairies, rocky slopes, and roadsides, limestone areas; se and e TX w to
e Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. May–Jun.

                                         BOWLESIA
AA mainly South American genus of 15 species. (Named for William Bowles, 1705–1780, Irish
writer on Spanish natural history)
REFERENCE: Mathias & Constance 1965.

Bowlesia incana Ruiz & Pav., (hoary, quite gray), HOARY BOWLESIA. Low, prostrate to suberect an-
nual, ± gray with stellate pubescence; leaves opposite; leaf blades suborbicular in outline, 5–7-
lobed, to 3 cm long and 4.5 cm wide, usually much smaller; petioles to 7 cm long; flowers
minute, white or purplish; fruits sessile to subsessile, ovate to round, 1–2 mm long. Lawn weed,
rarely collected but spreading rapidly in nc TX; Bell, Dallas, Denton, Johnson, Parker, and Tar-
rant cos., also Brown Co. (HPC); s and se TX n to nc TX and w to Edwards Plateau. Feb–Jun.
Native of South America and possibly also s North America; the geographic origin of this spe-
cies is problematic; it is found in South America and also in the sw U.S. and adjacent Mexico. It
was collected in TX in 1828 by Berlandier, but Mathias and Constance (1965) concluded that its
North American distribution is probably the result of naturalization from South America;
however, Constance (1993) considered it native to California and the sw US.

                             BUPLEURUM THOROUGHWAX
AA genus of ca. 180–190 species of Eurasia, n Africa, Canary Islands, arctic North America,
and s Africa. (Greek: bous, an ox, and pleuron, a rib, referring to another plant)
                                                       ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   245




                                                                      Ammoselinum popei [LUN ]


Ammoselinum butleri [LUN]




                            Anethum graveolens [GLE]




    Berula erecta [CO1]




                              Bifora americana [LUN]




                                                                        Bowlesia incana [MAT]
246   APIACEAE/CENTELLA

Bupleurum rotundifolium L., (round-leaved), ROUND-LEAF THOROUGHWAX. Annual to 60 cm tall;
leaves simple, entire; basal and lower leaves oblong- to obovate-lanceolate, subpetiolate to per-
foliate basally; upper leaves ovate, perfoliate; rays of inflorescence 4–10; involucel (bractlets be-
low umbellets) of 5–6 conspicuous, broadly ovate to obovate, acuminate bractlets; flowers yel-
low; fruits oblong-oval, 2.5–3 mm long, purplish brown, smooth. Open, weedy areas; Dallas,
Erath, Grayson, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX. Apr–Jun. Native of the Mediter-
ranean region. I

Bupleurum lancifolium Hornem., (lance-leaved), cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational
area 4 (Fig. 2), apparently occurs only to the se of nc TX. It can be distinguished by its ovoid-
globose, tuberculate to rugose fruits and by having only 2–5 rays. A Mediterranean species, pos-
sibly introduced in bird-seed (Correll & Johnston 1970). I

                                           CENTELLA
AA mainly s African genus of 40 species with 1 species widespread. (Possibly diminutive of
centem, a hundred, from the rounded, coin-like leaf blades of some species)
REFERENCES: Fernald 1940a; Schubert & van Wyk 1995.

Centella erecta (L.f.) Fernald, (upright, erect), SPADELEAF. Acaulescent perennial with creeping
rhizomes; leaves simple; leaf blades ovate to broadly ovate, basally cordate to truncate, peti-
olate; umbels simple; flowers white or rose-tinged; fruits with 3 primary and 2 secondary ribs,
reticulate. Edges of streams and other wet places; Tarrant Co.; in parts of e 1/2 of TX. May–Sep.
[C. repanda (pers.) Small] In Texas this species has long gone under the name C. asiatica (L.) Urb.
(e.g., Correll & Johnston 1970; Hatch et al. 1990; Jones et al. 1997). However, according to J.
Kartesz (pers. comm. 1998), C. asiatica is a similar but distinct species which is introduced in
the U.S. only in the Pacific Northwest and Hawaii. While C. asiatica is sometimes eaten or
taken as a tea, it is also said to be used as a fish poison and to contain potentially carcinogenic
glucosides and an alkaloid, hydrocotylin; it has been used in folk medicine to treat leprosy and
apparently shows activity against the bacterium responsible for tuberculosis (Duke 1985;
Mabberley 1997); because C. erecta is similar enough to have been lumped with C. asiatica by
many authorities, C. erecta should also be assumed to be toxic. 9

                        CHAEROPHYLLUM CHERVIL, WILD CHERVIL
AA n temperate genus of ca. 35 species. (Greek: chaero, delight or rejoice, and phyllon, a leaf,
alluding to the agreeable odor of the foliage)

Chaerophyllum tainturieri Hook., (for L.F. Tainturier des Essarts, who sent plants from Louisiana
to Sir William Hooker from 1824–1836). Moderately to densely pubescent, erect annual 15–90
cm tall; leaves ternate-pinnately dissected; flowers white; fruits narrowly oblong, 4.5–7 mm
long, slightly beaked or narrowed toward the apex. Stream bottoms, woods, roadsides, and
waste areas. Mid-Mar–Apr.

1. Ovary and fruit pubescent                                                         var. dasycarpum
1. Ovary and fruit glabrous or nearly so                                               var. tainturieri

var. dasycarpum Hook. ex S. Watson, (thick-fruited), HAIRY-FRUIT CHERVIL. Widespread in TX
but more commonly in e 1/2.

var. tainturieri. Widespread in TX but more commonly in e 1/2.

                                      CICUTA WATER-HEMLOCK
AA n temperate genus of 8 species; 9 all are extremely toxic. (Latin: cicuta, name of Conium
                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS                   247




                                                                         VAR. DASYCARPUM [USH ]




                                                                                                  VAR. TAINTURIERI [ BB2]




Bupleurum rotundifolium [LAM]



                                                                           Chaerophyllum tainturieri [BT3]

                                         Centella erecta [BR2]




                 Cicuta maculata [REE]                                    Conium maculatum [REE]
248   APIACEAE/CONIUM

maculatum—poison-hemlock, a deadly herb native to the Old World; the name was transferred
to this genus)
REFERENCES: Mathias & Constance 1942; Mulligan 1980.

Cicuta maculata L., (spotted), COMMON WATER-HEMLOCK, SPOTTED COWBANE, COWBANE, BEAVER-
POISON, SPOTTED WATER-HEMLOCK, MUSQUATROOT, MUSKRAT-WEED. Glabrous and glaucous, usu-
ally tall perennial to 2 m tall (occasionally flowering when much smaller); roots fleshy and fas-
cicled; leaves 2–3 times pinnately compound; flowers white; fruits oval to orbicular, 2–4 mm
long, with ribs prominent. Low or wet ground; Bell, Dallas, Henderson, and Lamar cos., also
Collin Co. (G. Diggs, pers. obs.); se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Late May–
Jul. [C. mexicana J.M. Coult. & Rose] Virulently poisonous due to cicutoxin, a resinoid which af-
fects the nervous system; a single bite is reported to be sufficient to kill a human; children have
even been poisoned by whistles made from the stems; in extreme cases death may occur in less
than an hour; some authorities consider this to be the most poisonous plant of the North Tem-
perate zone; fatalities are also known in browsing livestock (Stephens 1980; Turner &
Szczawinski 1991; Hardin & Brownie 1993). 9

                               CONIUM POISON-HEMLOCK
AA temperate Eurasian and s African genus of 6 species; 9 some are very poisonous. (Greek:
coneion, the hemlock, by which Socrates and various criminals were put to death at Athens)

Conium maculatum L., POISON-HEMLOCK, POISON-PARSLEY. Glabrous biennial to 3 m tall with dis-
tinctive unpleasant odor; root a carrot- or parsnip-like taproot; stems hollow, usually purplish-
spotted; leaves pinnately decompound; umbels compound, many-flowered; flowers white;
fruits broadly ovoid, 2–4 mm long. Stream bottoms; included based on citation of vegetational
area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), apparently from Travis Co. just beyond s margin of nc TX s
and sw through the s 1/2 of TX. May–Jun. Native of Europe and Asia. All parts of the plant are
extremely poisonous to humans and livestock due to coniine and other toxic alkaloids; often fa-
tal if eaten due to paralysis of respiratory muscles. The leaves can be mistaken for parsley, the
roots for parsnips, or the seeds for anise. It has been recognized as poisonous since ancient times
and is supposedly the source of the poison used to kill the Greek philosopher Socrates in 399
B.C.; it was apparently widely used as a means of execution by the early Greeks (Muenscher
1951; Kingsbury 1964, 1965; Hardin & Arena 1974; Mabberley 1987; Schmutz & Hamilton 1979;
Turner & Szczawinski 1991). Significant skin contact with the foliage can result in symptoms of
toxicity such as nausea or blurred vision. 9 I

                                CORIANDRUM CORIANDER
AA genus of 3 species native to sw Asia. (From the Greek name, koriandron, from koris, bug,
alluding to the aromatic leaves)

Coriandrum sativum L., (cultivated or sown), CILANTRO, CORIANDER, CHINESE-PARSLEY. Low gla-
brous annual 20–70 cm tall; basal leaves simple and lobed or pinnate, much less finely divided
than stem leaves; stem leaves pinnately dissected; outer flowers with rather large petals, some
bilobed; inner flowers with smaller petals; petals white, often tinged pink; fruits orbicular, (1.5–)
2.5–3(–5) mm in diam. Escapes cultivation, waste places; Dallas and McLennan cos., also
Grayson Co. (G. Diggs, pers. obs.); scattered in TX. Apr–May. Native of Mediterranean region.
Long cultivated for the fruits (e.g., seeds were found in the tomb of Tutankhamun—Hepper
1990); the foliage of this plant provides the flavoring so widely used in Mexican salsas and other
Latin American cuisines. I
                                                                      CRYPTOTAENIA /APIACEAE   249

                   CRYPTOTAENIA WILD CHERVIL, HONEWORT
AA genus 6 species of the n temperate region and tropical African mountains. (Greek: crypto,
hidden, and taenia , band or ribbon, referring to the concealed oil tubes)

Cryptotaenia canadensis (L.) DC., (of Canada). Largely glabrous perennial to 1 m tall; leaflets 3
or 5, thin, broadly lanceolate, sharply double-toothed, sometimes lobed; rays of umbel few;
pedicels very unequal; flowers white; fruits 3.5–8 mm broad. Woods; collected by Reverchon in
Dallas (Mahler 1988); recent collections in Dallas, Grayson, and Lamar cos.; also e TX. May.

                        CYCLOSPERMUM SLIM-LOBE CELERY
AA monotypic genus native to warm areas of the Americas; related to the genus Apium
which includes A. graveolens L. (CELERY). (Greek: cyclo, circle, and spermum, seed)

Cyclospermum leptophyllum (Pers.) Sprague ex Britton & P. Wilson, (slender-leaved), SLIM-LOBE
CELERY. Low glabrous annual 5–60 cm tall; leaves highly variable, the lowest with wide seg-
ments, the uppermost with almost thread-like segments; umbels axillary and terminal, sessile
or short-peduncled, typically with 3–5 rays (= main branches of umbel); flowers minute, white;
fruits ovoid, 1–2(–3) mm long. Ditches or low areas, disturbed sites; s TX nw to nc TX and w to
Trans-Pecos. Apr–Jun, sporadically later. [Apium leptophyllum(Pers.) F. Müll. ex Benth.] The
name of this genus is sometimes spelled Ciclospermum; however, the accepted spelling is
Cyclospermum(Greuter et al. 1993). Native from s US to South America. Reported to be poison-
ous (Burlage 1968). 9

                               CYMOPTERUS WAVEWING
AA w North American genus of 32 species including several eaten by Native Americans.
(Greek: cyma, a wave, and pteron, a wing, referring to the often undulate wings)
REFERENCE: Mathias 1930.

Cymopterus macrorhizus Buckley, (large-rooted), BIG-ROOT WAVEWING. Glabrous, glaucous,
dwarf perennial to 35 cm tall; from a thick, soft-woody, fusiform to subglobose root; leaves few,
crowded at base of plant, pinnate or bipinnate; flowers pink or nearly white; anthers purple-
black, prominent; fruits ovoid to ovoid-oblong, 4–9 mm long, 3–8 mm wide, the wings obvious.
Rocky limestone prairies; Blackland Prairie and Edwards Plateau w through Plains country;
endemic to TX and OK. Mar–Apr.

                                     CYNOSCIADIUM
AA North American genus of 2 species. (Greek: kyon or cyno, dog, and skiados, an umbel)

Cynosciadium digitatum DC., (finger- or hand-like), FINGER DOGSHADE. Glabrous annual; stems
to 65 cm tall; basal leaves linear-lanceolate, entire; stem leaves palmately compound or parted,
with 3–5 long narrow segments; flowers rather few, not conspicuous, white; fruits ovoid, 2–3
mm long. Wet places; Hunt and Lamar cos.; also Coastal Prairies. May.

                                        DAUCOSMA
AA monotypic genus endemic to TX. (Possibly from Daucus, the genus including carrots, and
Greek: osma, smell or odor)

Daucosma laciniatum Engelm. & A. Gray, (laciniate, torn), MEADOW DAUCOSMA. Annual to 1.2 m
tall; crushed leaves very aromatic; umbels compound, the rays 2–5 cm long; peduncles to 10 cm
long; involucres and involucels equaling or longer than rays and pedicels; flowers white; fruits
250   APIACEAE/DAUCUS

ovoid, 3–4 mm long, glabrous. Low disturbed areas; Bell Co. (Mathias & Constance 1961);
mainly s TX and Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. May–Aug. E

                                             DAUCUS CARROT
Hispid-pubescent annuals or biennials; leaf blades finely cut, the ultimate divisions narrowly
lanceolate; umbels compound, the outer rays becoming longer in age, the umbels then hollow
in center; fruits bristly.

AA genus of ca. 22 species of Europe, the Mediterranean, sw and c Asia, tropical Africa, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, and the Americas. (From daukos, the classical Greek name)

1. Petals white to yellowish, except those of central flower in umbel usually pink or purple; rays 15–
   50 mm long in flower, up to 75 mm in fruit; involucral bracts shorter than umbel in flower, di-
   vided into filiform divisions; bristles of fruit without prominent apical barbs                            D. carota
1. Petals white (withering yellowish), including those of central flower in umbel; rays 3–30 mm
   long in flower, up to 40 mm in fruit; involucral bracts ± equal to or exceeding the umbel in flower,
   divided into linear or lanceolate divisions; bristles of fruit with apical barbs                         D. pusillus

Daucus carota L., (carrot), WILD CARROT, QUEEN-ANNE’S-LACE. Biennial 0.4–1.5(–2) m tall; involu-
cral bracts usually reflexed; fruits 3–4 mm long. Roadsides or railroads, disturbed areas; Ellis,
Grayson, and Tarrant cos., also Lamar (Carr 1994) and Dallas (Moss Park—Ruth May, pers.
comm.) cos.; still spreading rapidly in e part of TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. First ob-
served in Tarrant Co. (in Keller) in 1996. May–Jul. Native of Europe. This species is an aggressive
invader capable of crowding out native vegetation. Handling the wet foliage of cultivated CAR-
ROT (D. carota subsp. sativus (Hoffm.) Arcang.) can apparently cause skin irritation in sensitive
individuals; photosensitization may be involved (Tampion 1977; Duke 1985); care should thus
be taken with both cultivated CARROT and WILD CARROT. 9 I

Daucus pusillus Michx., (very small), RATTLESNAKE-WEED, SOUTHWESTERN CARROT, SEEDTICKS.
Annual to ca. 0.9 m tall; fruits 3–5 mm long. Stream banks, roadsides, and waste areas; through-
out TX. Apr–Jun.

                                            ERYNGIUM ERYNGO
Plants creeping to erect; essentially glabrous; leaves entire to pinnately or palmately lobed to
divided, often spinose; inflorescences conspicuously head-like, globose to cylindrical, some-
times with a coma of bracts from apex of head; flowers white to purple; fruits variously cov-
ered with scales or tubercles.

AA genus of 230–250 species of tropical and temperate areas of the world; a number are edible
or cultivated as ornamentals. (From eyringion, the Greek name for E. campestre L.)
REFERENCES: Bell 1963; Mathias & Constance 1941b.

1. Leaves parallel-veined, broadly linear, completely unlobed and undivided, the margin entire ex-
   cept for remote bristles, to 1 m long; plants monocot-like in appearance                               E. yuccifolium
1. Leaves reticulate-veined, not linear, broader in shape, unlobed to usually palmately lobed or
   divided, to only 9 cm long, often much shorter; plants not monocot-like.
   2. Stem leaves conspicuously sharp-spinulose, palmately lobed or divided; bracts (including teeth)
      subtending heads > 2 mm wide (often much greater), usually spinulose; throughout nc TX.
      3. Heads 20–35 mm long, purplish to reddish; coma of 4–8 spinescent bracts 1–2 cm long
         projecting from apex of heads                                                                 E. leavenworthii
      3. Heads 8–15 mm long, bluish to purplish; coma bracts absent or inconspicuous, nearly entire.
         4. Plants erect, the stems solitary, branched above; basal leaves serrate or dentate, petioled;
            fruits 1–2 mm long; plants of limestone soils                                                     E. hookerii
                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       251




                                                             Cryptotaenia canadensis [BB1]
          Coriandrum sativum [BL1]




Cyclospermum leptophyllum [CO1]       Cymopterus macrorhizus [LUN]              Cynosciadium digitatum [LUN]




Daucosma laciniatum [LUN]            Daucus carota [BL1]                         Daucus pusillus [BT3, USH]
252   APIACEAE/ERYNGIUM

        4. Plants low, much-branched; basal leaves deeply palmately parted, sessile or subsessile;
           fruits 2.5–3 mm long; plants of sandy soils                                                    E. diffusum
  2. Stem leaves not sharp-spinulose or only slightly so, unlobed to palmately lobed or divided;
     bracts (including teeth if present) subtending heads very narrow, usually < 2 mm wide, entire
     or with 3–5 spinulose teeth; extreme e portion of nc TX.
     5. Plants erect; bracts subtending heads usually with 3–5 teeth (rarely entire); stem leaves not
        palmately lobed, usually serrate to laciniate or subentire; heads 5–15 mm wide, few–nu-
        merous in a cymose inflorescence terminating the stem                                       E. integrifolium
     5. Plants prostrate or weakly ascending; bracts subtending heads without teeth or nearly so;
        stem leaves entire to irregularly toothed, at least some palmately lobed; heads 2–4 mm
        wide, usually solitary in the leaf axils                                                       E. prostratum

Eryngium diffusum Torr., (diffuse, spreading), BUSHY ERYNGO, DIFFUSE ERYNGO. Annual or bien-
nial 10–40 cm tall; prostrate to erect; stem leaves deeply palmately parted, the divisions spinu-
lose-dentate or lobed; heads bluish; coma of bracts absent from apex of heads; fruits 2.5–3 mm
long. Sandy soils; Montague and Shackelford cos.; nearly throughout TX. May–Aug.

Eryngium hookeri Walp., (for William Jackson Hooker, 1785–1865, director of Kew Gardens),
HOOKER’S ERYNGO . Erect annual 30–60 cm tall; lower stem leaves nearly sessile, lanceolate,
laciniately toothed, spinulose; upper stem leaves ovate, palmately divided into 5–7 oblong, la-
ciniate or pinnatifid lobes; heads purplish; coma of a few bracts at apex of heads or coma ab-
sent; fruits 1–2 mm long. Moist limestone soils; Bell, Dallas, Denton, Ellis, Grayson, and
McLennan cos.; Blackland and Coastal prairies. Jul–Sep.

Eryngium integrifolium Walter, (entire-leaved), SIMPLE-LEAF ERYNGO. Erect perennial 30–80 cm
tall; stem leaves simple; heads ovoid to globose, 5–15 mm in diam., bluish, subtended by 6–10
linear bracts, the bracts 10–20 mm long; coma of bracts absent from apex of heads. Moist
wooded areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); se
and e TX w to at least Henderson Co. Aug–Oct.

Eryngium leavenworthii Torr. & A. Gray, (for its discoverer, Melines Conklin Leavenworth, 1796–
1862, s U.S. botanist, explorer, and army surgeon), LEAVENWORTH’S ERYNGO. Erect annual to 100
cm tall; vegetative tissues often purplish; upper stem leaves sessile, orbicular, deeply palmately
parted, the divisions pinnatifid, spiny; heads purplish to reddish; coma of 4–8 conspicuous
spinescent bracts projecting from apex of heads; sepals spinescent; stamens bluish; fruits 2–4
mm long, conspicuously covered with white scales. Prairies and weedy areas; nearly through-
out TX. Jul–Sep. This strikingly colored plant is often common and conspicuous. m/89

Eryngium prostratum Nutt. ex DC., (prostrate, flat to the ground). Creeping, prostrate, mat-form-
ing, or ascending perennial; stems 10–70 cm long, slender, 0.5–1 mm in diam.; basal leaves 2–4(–
5.5) cm long, entire to irregularly toothed, often palmately lobed; stem leaves reduced; heads
very small, to 5–9 mm long, short cylindric, often pale to dark blue or purple-blue, subtended
by 5–10 linear bracts to 12 mm long; coma of bracts absent from apex of heads. Lake margins
and other moist areas; Henderson, Limestone, and Milam cos. on e margin of nc TX, also Lamar
Co. in Red River drainage; mostly se and e TX. May–Sep.

Eryngium yuccifolium Michx., (with leaves like Yucca), RATTLESNAKE-MASTER, BUTTON SNAKE-
ROOT, BRISTLE-LEAF ERYNGO. Plant glabrous; perennial from tuberous root; stems 30–180 cm tall;
basal leaves broadly linear, to 1 m long; stem leaves like the basal but reduced upward; heads
globose-ovoid, 10–25 mm in diam.; coma of bracts absent from apex of heads. Prairies; Dallas,
Denton, and Grayson cos.; also Hunt, Kaufman, and Lamar cos. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); se and
e TX w to nc TX. May–Aug. We are following McGregor (1986) and Jones et al. (1997) in lumping
var. synchaetum. [E. yuccifoliumvar. synchaetum A. Gray ex J.M. Coult. & Rose, E. synchaetum
                                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       253




  Eryngium diffusum [LUN]                       Eryngium hookeri [LUN]               Eryngium integrifolium [GWO]




Eryngium leavenworthii [LUN]                 Eryngium yuccifolium [EN1]




                      Eryngium prostratum [BB2, CO1]                                     Eurytaenia texana [HEA, LUN ]
254   APIACEAE/EURYTAENIA

(A. Gray ex J.M. Coult. & Rose) J.M. Coult. & Rose] The common names refer to Native Ameri-
can and early settler use of poultices from the roots to treat snakebite (Tveten & Tveten 1993).
This species is an indicator of native prairie. m/89

                                EURYTAENIA TEXAS SPREADWING
AA genus of 2 species native to TX and OK. (Greek: eury, wide, and taeni, ribbon or band)

Eurytaenia texana Torr. & A. Gray, (of Texas), TEXAS SPREADWING. Largely glabrous annual 30–
120 cm tall; basal leaves lobed or pinnatifid; stem leaves pinnately or ternate-pinnately dis-
sected; inflorescence of loose compound umbels; rays 8–16; involucres usually of ca. 5 three-
cleft bracts 5–10 mm long; involucel bractlets similar to bracts or entire; pedicels 5–8 mm long;
petals white; fruits 4–6 mm long and broad. Rocky or sandy ground; Montague and Tarrant
cos.; widespread in TX except far w part; endemic to TX and OK. May–Jun.

                                         FOENICULUM FENNEL
AA mainly Asian genus of 4–5 species, widely naturalized; some authorities consider the ge-
nus monotypic (e.g., Mabberley 1987). (Latin: foenum, hay, presumably from the abundant
straw-like leaf segments; classical name for fennel)

Foeniculum vulgare Mill., (common), COMMON FENNEL. Glabrous strong-scented biennial or pe-
rennial; stems 0.9–2+ m tall; leaves pinnately decompound; rays 15–40; petals yellow; fruits 3–4
mm long. Widely cultivated and escapes, low areas; included based on citation of vegetational
area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); also s TX and Edwards Plateau. Spring–summer. Native of
the Mediterranean region. Cultivated for its fruits and essential oils used as flavoring and medi-
cine since the 13th century BC. (Mabberley 1987); however, distilled oil of fennel, even in small
quantities can be toxic and can cause symptoms including pulmonary edema, respiratory
problems, and seizures (Duke 1985). 9 I

            HYDROCOTYLE WATER-PENNYWORT, NICKELS-AND-DIMES
Ours glabrous creeping perennials of damp ground or shallow water, rooting at the nodes; leaves
peltate or not so; leaf blades shiny above, sometimes ± round; umbels simple, branched or ver-
ticillate; flowers inconspicuous, yellow-green or white; fruits without secondary ribs, not reticulate.

AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 130 species often with peltate leaves; some are cultivated as or-
namental ground covers. Some workers have suggested that if Araliaceae and Apiaceae are rec-
ognized as separate families (as done here), then the Hydrocotylaceae should be recognized as
well (e.g., Thorne 1992); however, the traditional approach of including Hydrocotyle in the
Apiaceae is followed here. (Greek: hydor, water, and kotyle, cup, alluding to the hollows in the
center of the leaves of some species)

1. Leaves peltate (= petiole attached to middle of lower surface of leaf blade); leaf blades shallowly
   lobed or toothed.
   2. Flowers in a simple umbel (= all attached at the same point)                                       H. umbellata
   2. Flowers in whorls (= verticils) forming an interrupted spike or spike-like raceme or rarely a
      branched spike                                                                                    H. verticillata
1. Leaves not peltate, the petiole attached at base of a deep, narrow notch; leaf blades 5–6-lobed
   to about the middle                                                                              H. ranunculoides

Hydrocotyle ranunculoides L.f., (resembling Ranunculus—buttercup), FLOATING WATER-PENNY-
WORT. Leaf blades roundish reniform, to 8 cm long and wide; petioles to ca. 35 cm long; umbels
simple, 5–10-flowered. Wet places; Dallas and Henderson cos.; e TX w to nc TX. Apr–Oct.
                                                                                    LIMNOSCIADIUM/APIACEAE    255

Hydrocotyle umbellata L., (with umbels), UMBRELLA WATER-PENNYWORT, OMBILIGO DE VENUS.
Leaf blades to 7.5 cm in diam.; petioles to ca. 40 cm long; umbels many-flowered. Wet places;
Burnet, Denton and Milam cos.; much of e 1/2 of TX. May–Oct.

Hydrocotyle verticillata Thunb., (verticillate, whorled). Leaf blades to ca. 6 cm in diam., with 8–
14 shallow lobes; petioles to 35 cm long; inflorescences interrupted, with 2–15-flowered whorls.
Wet places. May–Oct.

1. Fruits sessile or subsessile; inflorescences often bifurcate (= 2-branched)                    var. verticillata
1. Fruits pedicellate, the pedicels 1–10 mm long; inflorescences rarely bifurcate                  var. triradiata

var. triradiata (A. Rich.) Fernald, (three-rayed). Inflorescences with few 4–15-flowered verticils.
Dallas, Grayson, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau, also
Trans-Pecos.

var. verticillata. WHORLED WATER-PENNYWORT. Inflorescences with 2–7 few-flowered verticils.
Bell, Dallas, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau.

                                             LIMNOSCIADIUM
A A genus of 2 species of the sc United States; sometimes treated as part of the genus
Cynosciadium. (Greek: limne, a marsh, and skiados, an umbel)
REFERENCE: Mathias & Constance 1941a.

Limnosciadium pinnatum (DC.) Mathias & Constance, (pinnate, feather-like), ARKANSAS
DOGSHADE . Glabrous erect or ascending annual 10–80 cm tall; stem leaves pinnately compound
with 2–9 linear to linear-lanceolate divisions 3–10 cm long or the lowest and uppermost leaves
entire; flowers small but numerous and rather showy; petals white; calyx teeth in fruit shorter
than the stylopodium, 0.5 mm or less long; fruits oblong-oval, 2–4 mm long, 1–2 mm long.
Ditches or low ground; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. May–Jun.
[Cynosciadium pinnatum DC.]

Limnosciadium pumilum (DC.) Mathias & Constance, (dwarf), is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for
vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) but apparently occurs only to the s of nc TX. It can be distinguished
by its low and diffuse habit (plant 5–40 cm high or long), the oval to orbicular fruits 2–3 mm long
and 2 mm wide, and its calyx teeth in fruit equal in length to the stylopodium (to 1.5 mm long).

                                                 LOMATIUM
AA w North American genus of 74 species. (Greek, lomation, a little border, in reference to the
winged fruit)
REFERENCE: Schlessman 1984.

Lomatium foeniculaceum (Nutt.) J.M. Coult. & Rose subsp. daucifolium (Torr. & A. Gray)
Theobald, (sp.: like Foeniculum—fennel; subsp.: leaves like Daucus, carrot), CARROT-LEAF
LOMATIUM. Pubescent, dwarf, acaulescent perennial to 45 cm tall, from a thick taproot; leaf seg-
ments linear or linear-lanceolate; petals yellow; fruits ovate-oblong, 6–9 mm long, 3–6 mm
broad. Prairies, in calcareous clay; Collin, Dallas, Ellis, Grayson, and Montague cos.; also Nolan
Co. to the w of nc TX. Mar–Apr. [Lomatium daucifolium(Nutt. ex Torr. & A. Gray) J.M. Coult. &
Rose] m/96

                           OSMORHIZA SWEET-CICELY, ANISEROOT
AA genus of 10 species native to the Americas and e Asia. (Greek: osme, a scent, and rhiza , a
root, in reference to the odor of the root)
REFERENCES: Constance & Shan 1948; Lowry & Jones 1984.
256   APIACEAE/OXYPOLIS

Osmorhiza longistylis (Torr.) DC., (long-styled), ANISEROOT, LONG-STYLE SWEETROOT. Pubescent
perennial 0.6–1 m tall; leaflets thin, sharply toothed; rays of umbel few; petals white; fruits 15–
20 mm long, with some hairs on the ribs, terminated by appendages 2–3(–6) mm long. Woods,
along streams; Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant cos., also Collin Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); appar-
ently in TX only in the nc part of the state.

                               OXYPOLIS HOG-FENNEL, COWBANE
Erect perennials; leaves reduced to phyllodes or once pinnately compound; involucre of linear
to lanceolate bracts; petals white; calyx teeth present; fruits with lateral wings.
AA North American genus of 7 species. (Greek: oxys, sharp, and polios, white)
REFERENCE: Tucker et al. 1983.

1. Leaves reduced to elongate, linear, entire, hollow, septate phyllodes; leaflets absent (leaves rush-
   like in appearance); principal rays of umbels 6–14(–17)                                                O. filiformis
1. Leaves once pinnately compound, with distinct leaflets; principal rays of umbels 15–45                   O. rigidor

Oxypolis filiformis (Walter) Britton, (thread-like), LEAF-LESS COWBANE. Stems to 1.4 m tall; the
reduced leaves (phyllodes) 20–60 cm long are unique among nc TX Apiaceae; fruits 5–8 mm
long, 3–5 mm wide. Wet areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by
Hatch et al. (1990); mainly e TX. Jul–Sep.

Oxypolis rigidor (L.) Raf., (rigid, stiff), COWBANE, WATER DROPWORT, WATER DROPWORT COWBANE.
Stems 0.6–1.5 m tall; leaflets 5–9, lanceolate to linear, toothed or entire; fruits 4–7 mm long, 2.5–4
mm wide. Along streams, wet areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by
Hatch et al. (1990); mainly e TX. Aug–Oct. Reported to be poisonous to cattle (Burlage 1968). 9

                                       PETROSELINUM PARSLEY
AA genus of 2 species of Europe and the Mediterranean region. (Greek: petros, rock, and genus
name Selinum from selinon, celery)

Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Nyman ex A.W. Hill, (crisped, curled), PARSLEY, GARDEN PARSLEY,
CURLY PARSLEY. Glabrous, erect, pungent-scented biennial; stems 0.2–1.3 m tall; leaves ternately-
pinnately or pinnately decompound, 3–25 cm long, the ultimate segments 2–5 mm wide or
wider and divided into narrow lobes (usually < 5 mm wide), flat or curled and crisped; flowers
yellow or greenish yellow. Cultivated and possibly escapes in weedy areas; included based on
citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990). Summer. Native of Europe and w
Asia. Extensive contact has been reported to cause skin inflammation (Duke 1985). 9 I

                     POLYTAENIA PRAIRIE-PARSLEY, PRAIRIE-PARSNIP
AA North American genus of 1–2 species. (Greek: poly, many, and taenia , a ribbon or band,
which refers to the numerous oil tubes in the fruits)

Polytaenia nuttallii DC., (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-American botanist), PRAI-
RIE-PARSLEY, TEXAS-PARSLEY, WILD DILL. Stout glabrous biennial to 1 m tall; leaves bipinnately or
ternate-pinnately compound; leaflets large, crenate to incised or lobed, ovate to oblong; flowers
yellow; fruits 5–11 mm long, 4–7 mm wide, with wings. Common and conspicuous in prairies
and open woods, various soils; se and e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–May. While a
number of authors recognize two species in this genus (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997), be-
cause of apparent overlap and inconsistancy in fruit characters and because no means of dis-
tinguishing flowering material exist, we are following Shinners (1958a) and Mahler (1988) in
                                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS            257




      Foeniculum vulgare [CO 1]                       Hydrocotyle ranunculoides [MAS]

                                                                                                         Hydrocotyle umbellata [CO1]




     Hydrocotyle verticillata var. triradiata [MAS]
                                                                          Hydrocotyle verticillata var. verticillata [GWO]




Limnosciadium pinnatum [LUN]          Lomatium foeniculaceum subsp. daucifolium [BB2, BT3]                 Osmorhiza longistylis [HO1]
258   APIACEAE/PTILIMNIUM

including [P. texana (J.M. Coult. & Rose) Mathias & Constance, P. nuttallii var. texana J.M. Coult.
& Rose] in P. nuttallii. Mathias and Constance (1970) separated the 2 as follows:

1. Fruits 5–11 mm long, 4–7 mm broad, the lateral wings narrower and thicker than the body; oil
   several in the tubes indistinct, intervals                                                                 P. nuttallii
1. Fruits 9–11 mm long, 6–7 mm broad, the lateral wings broader and thinner than the body; oil
   tubes distinct, solitary in the intervals                                                                   P. texana


                    PTILIMNIUM MOCK BISHOP’S-WEED, MOCK BISHOP
Rather low, glabrous annuals of sandy or boggy ground; leaves pinnately decompound with the
ultimate divisions filiform; petals white, rarely pink.
AA genus of 5 species endemic to e North America. (Greek: ptilon, feather or down, and limne,
mud, in allusion to the finely divided leaves and the habitat)
REFERENCE: Easterly 1957.

1. Upper stem leaves with petioles 1–7 mm long (measure to attachment of 1st leaf segment), the
   blades 7–15 times as long as the petioles; leaf segments not crowded; plants smaller, to 85 cm
   tall; styles 0.2–1.5 mm long.
   2. Upper leaves with 5–9 primary segments, these mostly again divided, the terminal primary
      segment 0.5–2 cm long, shorter or slightly longer than the rachis, the primary segments usu-
      ally 3 per node on the rachis; involucral bracts usually branched; styles not strongly recurved,
      0.2–0.5 mm long                                                                                  P. capillaceum
   2. Upper leaves with 3–5 or rarely 7 primary segments, these all or mostly undivided, the
      terminal one 1–5 cm long, much longer than the rachis, the primary segments usually 2 per
      node on the rachis; involucral bracts usually entire; styles strongly recurved, 0.5–1.5 mm long
                                                                                                             P. nuttallii
1. Upper stem leaves with petioles 6–25 mm long, the blades less than 4 times as long as the
   petioles; leaf segments crowded; plants robust, 80–160 cm tall; styles ca. 1–3 mm long                  P. costatum

Ptilimnium capillaceum (Michx.) Raf., (with fine hairs), THREAD-LEAF MOCK BISHOP’S-WEED.
Plant 10–85 cm tall; flowers relatively few and small, not very showy; fruits broadly ovoid, 1.5–3
mm long. Wet places; Bell, Henderson, and Milam cos., once collected in Tarrant Co. (Mahler
1988); se and e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Late May–Aug.

Ptilimnium costatum (Elliott) Raf., (ribbed). Plant with few, widely spaced leaves; involucral
bracts usually entire; flowers numerous and prominent; fruits ovoid, 2–4 mm long. Wet places;
Grayson and Henderson cos.; e TX w to e part of nc TX; also Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct.

Ptilimnium nuttallii (DC.) Britton, (for its discoverer, Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-
American botanist), NUTTALL’S MOCK BISHOP’S-WEED. Resembling Bifora americana but usually
taller, with longer leaf segments, and smaller but rather showy flowers; fruits ovoid, 1–1.5 mm
long. Moist prairies, sandy or silty open ground, often abundant on roadsides; Denton, Hopkins,
Hunt, Kaufman, Limestone, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jul. We are following Easterly (1957) in treating Ptilimnium 3texense J.M.
Coult. & Rose [P. capillaceum 3 P. nuttallii , recognized by some authorities as a distinct species,
as a hybrid.

                            SANICULA BLACK SNAKEROOT, SANICLE
Largely glabrous biennials or perennials; leaves petiolate below to subsessile above, palmately
compound with 3–5 leaflets, the leaflets toothed and lanceolate, the largest > 1 cm wide, usu-
ally much wider; inflorescences at first short, barely exceeding the leaves, later elongating;
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS           259




Oxypolis filiformis [GWO]                      Oxypolis rigidor [CO1]                        Petroselinum crispum [BB2]




                                                                  FRUIT
                                                                 VARIATION


                        Polytaenia nuttallii [BT3, LUN]                                          Ptilimnium capillaceum [CO1]




                   Ptilimnium costatum [CO 1]                                Ptilimnium nuttallii [BB2]
260   APIACEAE/SCANDIX

flowers relatively few per ultimate umbel (= umbellet); perfect flowers subsessile, usually three
per umbellet; staminate flowers pedicellate, (0–)2–15 or more per umbellet; petals inconspicu-
ous, white to yellow-green; fruits bur-like, with numerous bristles.
AA nearly cosmopolitan genus of 39 species. (Latin: sanare , to heal, in reference to former me-
dicinal use of some species)
REFERENCES: Bicknell 1895; Shan & Constance 1951.

1. Petals white, shorter than or equaling the narrow, stiff, spine-tipped calyx lobes; styles not ex-
   serted, shorter than bristles of fruit; widespread in nc TX                                        S. canadensis
1. Petals yellow-green, exceeding the ovate-lanceolate, herbaceous calyx lobes; styles long-exserted
   in fruit, longer than bristles of fruit; rare in nc TX                                                 S. odorata

Sanicula canadensis L., (of Canada), CANADA SANICLE. Ultimate umbels with (0–)2–4 staminate
flowers; fruit bristles swollen at base. Woods and thickets; se and e TX w to e Rolling Plains (to
Taylor Co.—Mahler 1988), also Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun.

Sanicula odorata (Raf.) Pryer & Phillippe, (fragrant), CLUSTER SANICLE. Ultimate umbels with
up to 15 or more staminate flowers; fruit bristles not bulbous at base. Woods, thickets; Dallas
and Grayson cos.; e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–May. [S. gregaria E.P. Bicknell]

                                                   SCANDIX
AA genus of 15–20 species of Europe and the Mediterranean region. (Greek name for chervil,
another member of the carrot family)

Scandix pecten-veneris L., (comb of Venus), VENUS’-COMB, CROW-NEEDLES, SHEPHERD’S-NEEDLE,
LADY’S-COMB. Hispid annual; leaves pinnately decompound; ultimate leaf divisions short and
linear; petals white; fruits linear or narrowly oblong, 6–15 mm long, 1–2 mm broad, ciliate; beak
of fruit linear, 20–70 mm long, compressed laterally. Low moist areas; Dallas (Kidd Spring
Park—Mahler 1988), also Coastal Prairie. Mar–Apr. Native of Eurasia. I

                                         SIUM WATER-PARSNIP
AA n hemisphere and African genus of 14 species. (Greek: sion, the name of some wet area
plant)

Sium suave Walter, (sweet), WATER-PARSNIP, HEMLOCK. Perennial; stems erect, 0.5–1.2 m tall; su-
perficially very similar to Cicuta; leaves only once pinnate, rarely simple (submerged leaves
can be decompound); leaflets lanceolate to linear, 10–40(–60) mm long, serrate or incised; pet-
als white; fruits oval to orbicular, 2–3 mm long, the ribs prominent. Swamps, wet areas; in-
cluded based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly sc
TX. May–Sep. [S. cicutifolium Schrank] There are reports of this species causing livestock poi-
soning (Kingsbury 1964). 9

                                      SPERMOLEPIS SCALESEED
Low, glabrous annuals; leaves ternately or ternate-pinnately decompound, the ultimate divi-
sions linear to filiform; inflorescence of loose compound umbels; petals white; fruits 1.5–2 mm
long, with or without bristles.
AA genus of 5 species in North America, Argentina, and Hawaii. (Greek: sperma, seed, and
lepis, scale, alluding to the scruffy or bristly fruits of some species)

1. Ovaries and fruits with hooked short bristles                                                       S. echinata
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS    261




              Sanicula canadensis [TOR]                                       Sanicula odorata [TOR]




                Scandix pecten-veneris [BB1]                                Sium suave [CO1]




Spermolepis divaricata [LUN]               Spermolepis echinata [LUN ]                   Spermolepis inermis [LUN]
262   APIACEAE/TORILIS

1. Ovaries and fruits smooth or roughened with minute tubercles, but without bristles.
   2. Umbels with (2–)5–9(–11) rays; rays very unequal, 2–5 mm long in flower, up to 20 mm in age;
      fruiting pedicels very unequal, 6 mm long or less                                                   S. inermis
   2. Umbels with 2–4(–7) rays; rays nearly equal, 5–20 mm long in flower, up to 35 mm in age;
      fruiting pedicels about equal, usually much longer than 6 mm                                      S. divaricata

Spermolepis divaricata (Walter) Raf. ex Ser., (spreading, widely divergent), FORKED SCALESEED.
Plant erect, 10–70 cm tall. Open sandy areas, open woodlands; Bosque, Callahan, Grayson,
Henderson, Denton, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun.

Spermolepis echinata (Nutt. ex DC.) A. Heller, (prickly), BEGGAR’S-LICE, BRISTLY SCALESEED. Plant
erect, often spreading, to 40 cm tall. Sandy soils; widespread in TX, but mainly East Cross Tim-
bers w through w part of state. Mar–May.

Spermolepis inermis (Nutt. ex DC.) Mathias & Constance, (unarmed), SPREADING SCALESEED.
Plant erect, 10–60 cm tall. Sandy or gravelly soils; Blackland Prairie to s and w TX. Apr–May.

                                       TORILIS HEDGE-PARSLEY
Hispid annuals; leaves once pinnate or pinnately decompound; petals white; fruits in ours 3–5
mm long, bristly.
AA genus of 15 species native to the Canary Islands, the Mediterranean region to e Asia, and
tropical and s Africa. (Name used by Adanson in 1763; possibly from Latin: torus, cushion)

1. Flowers pedicelled, in terminal, peduncled, open umbels; plants erect                                  T. arvensis
1. Flowers subsessile, in axillary, sessile or short-peduncled, head-like umbels; plants reclining to
   suberect                                                                                                T. nodosa

Torilis arvensis (Huds.) Link, (pertaining to cultivated fields), HEDGE-PARSLEY. Plant 30–100 cm
tall; fruit bristles with microscopic barbs. Waste or disturbed ground, especially low or shady
places, chiefly in limestone areas; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Lampasas Cut
Plain, also Edwards Plateau. May–Jun. Native of Mediterranean region. A problematic weed in
some areas. The mericarps of this species were used in the successful prosecution of a kidnap-
ping/child molestation case in Fort Worth in 1995. A 2 year old girl was pulled from the win-
dow of her apartment, kidnapped, sexually molested, and then left in a weedy area ca. 100
meters from where she was abducted. Law enforcement officials found plant fragments on the
suspect’s shoes and also collected assorted plant material from the crime scene. Botanists at
BRIT identified the material from both the shoes and the crime scene as mericarps of Torilis
arvensis, thus linking the suspect with the scene of the crime. This forensic botanical evidence,
in combination with various other types of evidence, led to a conviction and a 99 year jail term
(Lipscomb & Diggs 1998). I

Torilis nodosa (L.) Gaertn., (with nodes), KNOTTED HEDGE-PARSLEY. Plant to 60(–100) cm tall; ul-
timate leaf divisions filiform. Waste or disturbed ground, especially low or shady places,
chiefly in limestone areas, can become a pest in lawns; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers,
also Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun. Native of Mediterranean region. I

                                               TREPOCARPUS
AA monotypic genus of the s United States. (Greek: trep, turn, and karpos, fruit)

Trepocarpus aethusae Nutt. ex DC., (presumably referring to resemblance to Aethusa—fool’s
parsley, another genus of Apiaceae). Glabrous erect annual 35–50 cm tall; leaves pinnately de-
                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             263




                                                          FRUIT FROM INSIDE
                                                           OF FLOWER GROUP




                                                         FRUIT FROM OUTSIDE
                                                          OF FLOWER GROUP




                                       Torilis nodosa [BT 3, ROB]




Torilis arvensis [HEA]




Zizia aurea [BB1]                  Trepocarpus aethusae [LUN]
264   APOCYNACEAE

compound, the ultimate divisions linear; petals white; fruits oblong or broadly oblong-linear,
8–10 mm long. Woods and thickets, especially in low ground; Collin, Dallas, Grayson, and Hunt
cos., also Lamar (Carr 1994) and Tarrant (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; se and e TX w to East
Cross Timbers. May–Jun.

                                                      ZIZIA
AA North American genus of 4 species. (Named for Johann Baptist Ziz, 1779–1829, a Rhenish
(= of the Rhine region) botanist)

Zizia aurea (L.) W.D.J. Koch, (golden), GOLDEN-ALEXANDERS, GOLDEN ZIZIA. Glabrous perennial
40–100 cm tall; leaves once or twice compound; ultimate leaflets ovate- or oblong-lanceolate,
sharply toothed; petals yellow; fruits 2–4 mm long. Low woods; Grayson and Lamar cos., also
Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988); mainly e TX. Apr–May.


        APOCYNACEAE OLEANDER OR DOGBANE FAMILY
Ours perennial herbs or vines with milky juice; leaves opposite or whorled (except alternate in
Amsonia), sessile or very short-petioled, simple, entire, deciduous or evergreen; flowers axillary
or terminal, solitary or in cymes; sepals 5, barely united at base; corollas salverform, funnelform,
campanulate, cylindric, or urceolate, with 5 lobes, the throat or summit of tube usually with a
constriction, crown, or dense zone of hairs; stamens 5, separate; pollen not in pollinia; pistils 2,
united by styles and/or stigmas only (superficially flowers can appear to have 2 separate pis-
tils); ovaries superior; fruit of 2 (or 1 by abortion) follicles (or in other areas berries or drupes).
AA medium-large (1,900 species in 165 genera), pantropical family with some temperate spe-
cies; vegetatively it includes mainly lianas, trees, shrubs, and a few temperate herbs; they have
ubiquitous laticifer systems, glycosides, and alkaloids. The family contains many ornamental,
poisonous, and medicinal species including the beautiful Plumeria rubra L. (FRANGIPANI), the
widely planted but very poisonous Nerium oleander L. (OLEANDER), Rauvolfia serpentina (L.)
Kurz, the source of the medicinal alkaloid reserpine, Acokanthera species, from which deadly
arrow poisons (cardiac glycosides including ouabain with an effect like digitalin) are obtained
in Africa, Strophanthus, an Old World genus yielding arrow poisons and the cardiac drug stro-
phanthin, and Catharanthus, the source of alkaloids used in cancer treatments (see below). 9
OLEANDER, a commonly used ornamental, contains extremely poisonous cardiac glycosides
(e.g., neriin and oleandrin) resembling digitalin in action; a single leaf can kill an adult; chil-
dren have been poisoned by sucking nectar or chewing leaves; poisoning may result from using
twigs as skewers for food or even inhaling the smoke; even water in which flowers have been
placed is toxic (Schmutz & Hamilton 1979; Morton 1982; Powell 1988). The sap of all species
should be avoided. Apocynaceae are closely related to Asclepiadaceae (MILKWEED family) and
considered paraphyletic when treated separately (Judd et al. 1994); Liede (1997), for example,
treated the asclepiads as subfamily Asclepiadoideae in the Apocynaceae. From a cladistic
standpoint the two should be lumped to form a more inclusive monophyletic Apocynaceae
(Judd et al. 1994). (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs or vines with simple, entire, often opposite leaves,
milky sap, sympetalous corollas usually with a distinct tube, and 2 pistils united only by their
styles and/or stigmas. Similar to Asclepiadaceae (e.g., herbs or vines with milky sap) but that
family has flowers with a distinctive corona and a gynostegium (= combined structure com-
posed of stamens and pistils).
REFERENCES: Woodson 1938; Rosatti 1989; Judd et al. 1994.

1. Plant a trailing and climbing vine; corollas cream or yellowish white to pale yellow   Trachelospermum
                                                                                    AMSONIA /APOCYNACEAE        265

1. Plant erect or a trailing vine with ascending branches, not climbing; corollas blue to lavender-
   blue, purple-red, white, green, or yellow; native and introduced species.
   2. Leaves alternate; flowers blue to lavender-blue (rarely white), in many-flowered cymes usually
      terminating the stems                                                                               Amsonia
   2. Leaves opposite or whorled; flowers either 1–2 in leaf axils OR if in cymes then white to green
      or yellow.
      3. Corollas salverform to funnelform, blue to lavender-blue, lavender, purple-red, or white,
         large, > 15 mm broad; seeds without a coma of hairs.
         4. Perennial trailing vines with ascending branches; corollas blue to lavender-blue (rarely
            white); peduncles (=flower stalks) 10–40 mm long                                                 Vinca
                                                                                                                 a
         4. Erect, tender perennial grown as an annual; corollas purple-red to lavender or white, of-
            ten with a dark eye; peduncles 2–4 mm long                                                Catharanthus
      3. Corollas campanulate to cylindric or urceolate, white to green or yellow, small, 2–4 mm
         broad; seeds with a coma of hairs                                                              Apocynum


                                  AMSONIA BLUESTAR, SLIMPOD
Largely glabrous perennials from woody rootstocks; leaves numerous, alternate, filiform to lan-
ceolate or elliptic; flowers in compact terminal cymes; corollas salverform, light to deep blue or
lavender, rarely white, with narrow lobes; follicles erect to pendulous, slender; seeds numerous,
without a coma.
AA genus of 20 species native to North America and Japan; a number have alkaloids and
some are cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for Charles Amson, 18th century Gloucester, Vir-
ginia physician and friend of John Clayton)
REFERENCES: Woodson 1928, 1929; McLaughlin 1982.

1. Corollas sharply constricted at orifice, with tube 25–40 mm long; leaf blades filiform to linear-
   lanceolate, to only ca. 4 mm wide; sw part of nc TX                                                A. longiflora a
1. Corollas not constricted at orifice, with tube 6–10 mm long; leaf blades filiform to lanceolate or
   elliptic, to 30 mm wide; widespread in nc TX.
   2. Corollas glabrous outside; leaf blades 0.5–17 mm wide, usually lanceolate to linear or filiform
      (rarely elliptic), usually 5(–8) cm or less long                                                     A. ciliata
   2. Corollas pubescent outside, at least in bud; leaf blades 8–30 mm wide, narrowly lanceolate to
      elliptic, often > 5 cm long                                                             A. tabernaemontana

Amsonia ciliata Walter var. texana (A. Gray) J.M. Coult., (sp.: ciliate, fringed; var.: of Texas), TEXAS
SLIMPOD, TEXAS AMSONIA. Plant usually 15–70 cm tall, forming loose clumps or patches from
creeping rootstocks; corolla tube 6–10 mm long, ca. 1 mm in diam. at base; corolla lobes 3.5–11
mm long; follicles 6–11 cm long; seeds 5–11 mm long. Chiefly gravelly limestone soils, less com-
monly sandy ground; Blackland Prairie w to Rolling Plains, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–early
May. [A. texana (A. Gray) A. Heller]

Amsonia ciliata var. tenuifolia (Raf.) Woodson, (slender-leaved), [A. ciliata Walter var. filifolia
Woodson], is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2). According to Jus-
tin Williams (pers. comm.), who is doing revisionary work on the genus, this is a taxon of the e
U.S. that does not reach TX.

Amsonia longiflora Torr. var. salpignantha (Woodson) S.P. McLaughlin, (sp.: long-flowered; var.:
trumpet flower), TRUMPET SLIMPOD. Plant 20–35 cm tall; stems usually clustered from base;
leaves 2–5 cm long; corolla tube ca. 1.5 mm in diam. at base, inflated at insertion of stamens and
then constricted at orifice; corolla lobes 5–10 mm long; follicles 7–9 cm long; seeds 5–12 mm
long. Limestone hills and rocky prairies; Hamilton Co. (the type locality is on Cowhouse
266   APOCYNACEAE/APOCYNUM

Creek—Woodson 1928), also Bell Co. (further downstream on Cowhouse Creek on Fort Hood—
Sanchez 1997); sw part of nc TX through the Edwards Plateau to the Trans-Pecos. Mar–May. [A.
salpignantha Woodson]

Amsonia tabernaemontana Walter, (for Jacob Theodore von Bergzabern, (d. 1590), Heidelberg
botany professor who Latinized his name as Tabernaemontanus), WILLOW SLIMPOD, CREEPING
SLIMPOD. Plant to 120 cm tall; leaves to 12 cm long; corolla tube 6–8 mm long, ca. 1 mm in diam.
at base; corolla lobes 5–10 mm long; follicles 8–14 cm long. Stream bottom thickets; se and e TX w
to East Cross Timbers. April. Texas material of this species has traditionally gone under the names
A. illustris Woodson and A. repens Shinners. According to J. Williams (pers. comm.), A. illustris,
which occurs only to the n of TX, should be put into synonymy with A. tabernaemontana var.
gattingeri Woodson. A manuscript in preparation by Williams will name a new variety of A.
tabernaemontana for the material of this species that occurs in TX; in the interim we are sim-
ply recognizing the TX material as A. tabernaemontana. [A. repens Shinners]

                             APOCYNUM DOGBANE, INDIAN-HEMP
AA genus of ca. 12 species of s Russia to China and temperate America. (Greek: apo, far from,
and kyon or cyon, a dog, from ancient use as dog poison and ancient name of the Old World
dogbane)
REFERENCES: Woodson 1930; McGregor 1984b.

Apocynum cannabinum L., (resembling Cannabis–hemp), INDIAN-HEMP, HEMP DOGBANE, PRAIRIE
DOGBANE, HAIRY DOGBANE, SMOOTH DOGBANE, WILLOW DOGBANE, CHOCTAWROOT. Herbaceous
perennial with deep root, glabrous to pubescent; stems erect to ascending, to 1 m tall; leaves
usually opposite, the blades variable in shape, linear-lanceolate to oval, sessile or short petiolate,
narrowed to rounded or cordate and clasping basally; flowers in small usually terminal cymes,
5-merous; corollas white, yellow, or greenish, 3–6 mm long; follicles 4–22 cm long, pendulous at
maturity, glabrous; seeds numerous, each terminated by a coma of long, silky hairs. Open or
disturbed, often moist ground, sandy or less often gravelly or eroding clayey soils; nearly
throughout TX. Apr–Jul. [A. cannabinum L. var. glaberrimum A. DC., A. cannabinum L. var.
pubescens(J. Mitch. ex R. Br.) Woodson, A. sibiricum Jacq.] The bark has been used as a source of
fiber and the root as an emetic and cardiac stimulant (Mabberley 1987); however, it is poisonous
to animals such as cats, dogs, and livestock due to the presence of the cardiac glycoside
apocynamarin, resins, and other toxins; sickness and death have been reported in humans from
medicinal use (Kingsbury 1964; Schmutz & Hamilton 1979; Fuller & McClintock 1986;
Mulligan & Munro 1990). We are following Kartesz (1994) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in
treating this as a single variable species; several previously recognized taxa (including
A. sibiricum) that intergrade with A. cannabinum have been lumped into this species; Jones
et al. (1997) recognized A. sibiricum at the specific level. Mahler (1988) separated the two as
follows: 9
1. Leaves narrowed to broadly rounded basally, petiolate; floral bracts scarious, aristate   A. cannabinum
1. Leaves cordate, sessile, usually some clasping; floral bracts foliaceous                      A. sibiricum


                                              CATHARANTHUS
AA tropical genus of 6 species, 5 endemic to Madagascar, 1 India and Sri Lanka; previously rec-
ognized in Vinca. (Greek: katharos, pure, and anthos, flower)

Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don, (rose-colored), MADAGASCAR PERIWINKLE, ROSE PERIWINKLE,
OLD-MAID, CAYENNE-JASMINE, CAPE PERIWINKLE. Erect herb 20–60 cm tall; leaves obovate or
oblanceolate, apiculate, 3–7 cm long; flowers 1–2 in upper leaf axils; peduncles 2–4 mm long;
corollas showy, salverform, the tube 20–25 mm long; follicles erect, puberulent, striately ridged.
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS          267




Amsonia ciliata var. texana [SHI]   Amsonia longiflora var. salpignantha [AMB, HEA]       Amsonia tabernaemontana [ HEA]




                                              Apocynum cannabinum [REE]                       Catharanthus roseus [BT3, NIC]




     Trachelospermum asiaticum [HEA]                                      Trachelospermum difforme [CO 1]
268    APOCYNACEAE/TRACHELOSPERMUM

Commonly grown in flower beds in summer, and sometimes appearing spontaneously in land-
scapes; not frost-resistant; Tarrant Co., also included for nc TX by Mahler (1988). Jun–Oct. Na-
tive of Madagascar, now pantropical. [Vinca rosea L.] Widely cultivated as an ornamental and
also produces at least 80 alkaloids including vinblastine, vincristine, and others useful in the
treatment of certain cancers including Hodgkin’s disease and leukemia; this species is consid-
ered the most important plant to date in terms of cancer treatment; if misused the alkaloids are
potentially toxic; they can act as an abortifacient (Duke 1985; Mabberley 1987; McGuffin et al.
1997). 9 I

                          TRACHELOSPERMUM CLIMBING-DOGBANE
Vines; leaves opposite, entire, short-petioled; flowers in loose cymes; corollas salverform or
subfunnelform with cylindrical tube and oblong lobes overlapping to the right; corolla tube
slightly inflated above insertion of stamens; stamens inserted near middle to upper part of co-
rolla tube; fruit of 2 elongate, slender, terete follicles.
AA genus of 20 species of climbing or clambering vines with milky sap native from India to
Japan with 1 in the se United States; a number are cultivated as ornamentals. (Greek: trachelos, a
neck, and sperma, seed, referring to the narrow seeds)

1. Leaves thinly membraneous, deciduous, 4–14 cm long; native species in moist and weedy areas
   in ne part of nc TX                                                                                          T. difforme
1. Leaves coriaceous, evergreen, 2–8(–10) cm long; introduced species spreading or persisting from
   cultivation.
   2. Calyx lobes erect, usually shorter than or ca.equal to narrow part of corolla tube; anthers slightly
      exserted                                                                                                 T. asiaticum
   2. Calyx lobes strongly recurved, longer than narrow part of corolla tube; anthers included
                                                                                                             T. jasminoides

Trachelospermum asiaticum (Siebold & Zucc.) Nakai, (of Asia), ASIAN-JASMINE, JAPANESE STAR-
JASMINE. Plant trailing and climbing; leaves evergreen, coriaceous, deep green in color, elliptic to
ovate or elliptic-oblong, 2–6.5 cm long (usually towards lower end of this range); flowers fra-
grant; corollas yellowish white. Generally not flowering in nc TX. One of the most widely
planted ground covers in nc TX, including in full sun; persists and spreads from cultivation;
Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs). Early summer. Native of Korea and Japan. I

Trachelospermum difforme (Walter) A. Gray, (of unusual or differing forms), AMERICAN STAR-
JASMINE, CLIMBING-DOGBANE. Twining vine climbing on trees; leaves variable in shape, lanceolate
to elliptic, ovate, or even suborbicular, to 14 cm long and 8 cm wide but mostly to only slightly
more than half that size; corollas creamy white to pale yellow; anthers not exserted. Along
streams, forest margins, weedy areas; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage (Correll & Correll 35922,
TEX); se and e TX w to ne corner of nc TX. Apr–Jun.

Trachelospermum jasminoides (Lindl.) Lem., (resembling Jasminum—jasmine), STAR-JASMINE,
CONFEDERATE-JASMINE. Plant climbing and trailing; leaves evergreen, coriaceous, deep green in
color, elliptic to ovate or obovate, 4–8(–10) cm long; flowers fragrant; corollas white, or with
yellowish tinge near tube. Cultivated and spreading, climbing up sides of buildings; Grayson
Co. (Austin College campus). May–early Jun. Native of China. I

                                             VINCA PERIWINKLE
Ours creeping or trailing perennials; leaves opposite, evergreen; flowers axillary, usually soli-
tary; corollas salverform to funnelform with cylindrical tube and 5 equal lobes widely spread-
                                                                                         ILEX /AQUIFOLIACEAE   269

ing, twisted to the left, thickened or hairy at throat, blue to lavender-blue, rarely white; paired
follicles erect, glabrous, smooth; seeds without a coma.
AA genus of 7 species native from Europe to n Africa and c Asia including cultivated orna-
mentals; some species contain alkaloids. (Name abbreviated from Latin: vinca pervinca, from
vincio, to bind, alluding to the use of the foliage in wreaths; the ancient name reflected in the
colloquial Italian pervinca, French pervenche, Middle English per wynke, and English peri-
winkle)

1. Leaves short petiolate (1–2 mm long) or sessile; leaf blades usually not narrowed at base, rounded
   to truncate or subcordate; calyx lobes ca. 10 mm long; corolla tube ca. 15 mm long                    V. major
1. Leaves petiolate, the petioles usually much more than 2 mm long; leaf blades usually narrowed
   at base; calyx lobes to 3 mm long; corolla tube 3–6 mm long                                           V. minor

Vinca major L., (large), BIG-LEAF PERIWINKLE. Leaves to 7 cm long, to 5 cm wide. Cultivated, espe-
cially in limestone areas; readily spreads in woods and along streams and can overcome native
herbaceous vegetation; Bell, Dallas, Grayson, and Williamson cos., also Tarrant Co. (R.
O’Kennon, pers. obs.); scattered in e 1/2 of TX. Mainly Mar–Apr (but year round; observed in
cultivation in Sherman flowering virtually every month of the year). Native of se Europe and
sw Asia. I

Vinca minor L., (little), COMMON PERIWINKLE. Leaves elliptic, 2–4.5(–6) cm long, 1–1.5(–2.5) cm
wide. Cultivated, wooded areas; included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2)
by Hatch et al. (1990); however, we have seen no nc TX material; supposedly naturalized
throughout TX (vegetational areas 1–10—Hatch et al. 1990). Native of s Europe. Mar–May. I


                          AQUIFOLIACEAE HOLLY FAMILY
AA medium-sized (420 species in 4 genera), almost cosmopolitan family of usually evergreen
trees and shrubs. Ilex is economically important for its hard white wood, as an ornamental, and
as a source of Christmas decorations. Family name conserved from Aquifolium, a genus now
treated as Ilex (the name Ilex was published earlier and thus has priority in terms of nomencla-
ture). (Classical Latin name for holly) (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: shrubs or small trees with alternate simple leaves and small,
inconspicuous, axillary, often 4-merous, frequently unisexual flowers; fruit a small, drupe-like,
red or orange berry.
REFERENCES: Lundell 1961; Brizicky 1964a.

                                                 ILEX HOLLY
Ours shrubs or small trees with mostly smooth, light gray bark; leaves alternate, short-petioled,
simple; leaf blades nearly entire to crenulate or serrulate (spinose-dentate in species outside nc
TX), evergreen and leathery or deciduous; stipules minute, falling early; flowers small, axillary,
solitary or in sessile or peduncled, umbel-like or cymose clusters, usually unisexual (plants dio-
ecious, often with some perfect flowers); calyces rotate or shallowly funnelform, 4–5-lobed; pet-
als 4–5, oblong-elliptic, white, exceeding the calyces; stamens (or staminodes) 4–5; pistil 1;
ovary superior; fruit a small drupaceous berry, globose or nearly so, usually with 4 stones.
A A genus of ca. 400 species, cosmopolitan, especially tropical and temperate Asia and
America; various species are used as ornamentals, for timber, or as a source of stimulants (con-
tain alkaloids including caffeine and theobromine). Ilex paraguariensis A. St.-Hil. (YERBA MATÉ)
is used as a tea in South America. Apparently the Roman use of holly for Saturnalia was taken
over by Christians for Christmas. 9 The fruits of Ilex species, while an important source of
food for native birds, are considered somewhat poisonous due to the presence of saponins; they
270   ARALIACEAE

cause vomiting, diarrhea, and stupor if eaten in quantity (Hardin & Arena 1974; Lampe &
McCann 1985). (Ancient Latin name of the holly-oak, rather than of the holly)

1. Larger leaf blades on flowering branches spatulate, oblanceolate, or obovate, with long-
   tapering base, pubescent beneath along midrib; leaves deciduous                                     I. decidua
1. Larger leaf blades on flowering branches oblong-lanceolate or oblong-elliptic, abruptly narrowed
   or rounded-truncate basally, glabrous beneath; leaves evergreen                                    I. vomitoria

Ilex decidua Walter, (deciduous), DECIDUOUS HOLLY, POSSUMHAW, WINTERBERRY, BEARBERRY, HOLLY,
MEADOW HOLLY, PRAIRIE HOLLY, WELK HOLLY. Petioles 2–11 mm long, leaf blades to 80 mm long
and 45 mm wide; fruits bright red or orange, to ca. 7.5 mm in diam. Rock outcrops, ravines, and
disturbed areas; se and e TX w to Bell, Dallas (Lundell 1961), and Grayson cos., also Comanche
(Little 1976 [1977]), Parker (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.), and Tarrant (Lundell 1961) cos.; also to
Edwards Plateau. Mar–May. The persistent, red or orange fruits are often conspicuous during
the winter on the otherwise bare branches. Fruits poisonous (Lampe & McCann 1985). 9

Ilex vomitoria Sol. in Aiton, (emetic), YAUPON, YAUPON HOLLY, CASSINE, CASSENA, CASSIO-BERRY
BUSH, CHOCOLATE DEL INDIO, EMETIC HOLLY, EVERGREEN CASSENA, EVERGREEN HOLLY, INDIAN
BLACKDRINK, SOUTH-SEA-TEA. Petioles 1–3 mm long, leaf blades to 55 mm long and 28 mm wide;
fruits bright red, to ca. 6.5 mm in diam. Commonly cultivated, low woods, sandy areas; Fannin
Co. (Talbot property) in Red River drainage and Limestone Co., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994), also
naturalized in Dallas and Tarrant cos. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); mainly se, e, and sc Texas. Mid–
late Apr. This species is one of the most widely used evergreen landscape shrubs in nc TX. The
leaves contain caffeine and were used by Native Americans to make a ceremonial drink
(known as “black drink”); during religious festivals they drank large amounts of a strong prepa-
ration which caused vomiting—thus the specific epithet (Havard 1896; Alston & Schultes 1951;
Correll & Johnston 1970; Cox & Leslie 1991). The authority for this species is often given as
Aiton (Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997). However, Hatch et al. (1990) gave Solander in Aiton.
Stafleu and Cowen (1976) indicated the botanical descriptions in Hortus Kewensis were not
made by the Aitons but instead by Solander, Dryander, and Robert Brown based on material
from Kew (Stafleu & Cowen 1976). On this basis, authorities for a number of taxa may have to
be reexamined. Fruits poisonous (Lampe & McCann 1985). 9

Ilex opaca Aiton, (opaque, shaded), (AMERICAN HOLLY, WHITE HOLLY), occurs in se and e TX just
to the e of nc TX. It has large (to 12 cm long and 6 cm wide), evergreen, coriaceous leaves that
are usually conspicuously spinose-dentate (sometimes entire or nearly so) and painful to the
touch. The species is valued for its strikingly white wood, used for veneer and decorative inlays
(Tyrl et al. 1994). Fruits poisonous (Lampe & McCann 1985). 9


              ARALIACEAE GINSENG OR ARALIA FAMILY
AA medium-sized (1,325 species in 47 genera), mainly tropical family with a few in temperate
regions. It contains trees, shrubs, lianas, woody epiphytes, or rarely herbs; leaves are often large
and compound. The family includes a number of ornamentals (e.g., Hedera , Schefflera) as well
as the economically important Panax quinquefolius L. (GINSENG), which supposedly acts as a
stimulant and aphrodisiac. The Araliaceae are closely related to the Apiaceae and probably
paraphyletic when treated separately. From a cladistic standpoint they should be lumped to
form a more inclusive monophyletic family, which based on nomenclatural rules should be
called Apiaceae (Judd et al. 1994). Family name from Aralia , a genus of 36+ species of North
America, e Asia, and Malaysia; some are edible or used medicinally. Aralia spinosa L., (spiny),
HERCULES’-CLUB, DEVIL’S-WALKINGSTICK, occurs in se and e TX just e of nc TX and would not be
unexpected on the e margin of nc TX. It is a shrub or tree to 12 m or more tall, with alternate
                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   271




                                                                                     Vinca major [BEN]




             Trachelospemum jasminoides [HEA]


                                                                                Vinca minor [ORA]




Ilex decidua [SA3]                         Ilex vomitoria [SA3]                       Hedera helix [BL1]
272   ARISTOLOCHIACEAE/ARISTOLOCHIA

decompound leaves to 1(+) m long, coarsely prickly stems and petioles, umbels in a large, termi-
nal, compound panicle, white petals, 2–3 mm long, and black berries 4–6 mm in diam. The
leaves and fruits are reported as potentially poisonous (Hardin & Brownie 1993). 9 (From the
French-Canadian name, aralie ) (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is an introduced, woody, evergreen
vine with alternate leaves exhibiting leaf dimorphism—at least some leaves are 3–5 palmately
lobed; flowers small in solitary or racemose umbels; fruit a small drupe. The similar Apiaceae
(e.g., small flowers in umbels; inferior ovary) are herbaceous and have schizocarp fruits while
Araliaceae are usually woody with drupes or berries.
REFERENCES: Smith 1944; Graham 1966; Eyde & Tseng 1971; Judd et al. 1994.

                                          HEDERA IVY
AA genus of 4–11 species of vines native to Europe, the Mediterranean region, and e Asia;
thought to be related to Schefflera, a widely used ornamental. (The ancient Latin name)

Hedera helix L., (Greek for a twining plant), ENGLISH-IVY. Woody, evergreen, trailing or high-
climbing vine with 4–10-rayed stellate pubescence; leaves alternate, dimorphic, the adult and
juvenile differently shaped, 3–5 palmately lobed or ovate to lanceolate, dark green, often with
paler markings; flowers small, in terminal, solitary or racemose umbels; ovary inferior; fruit a
small, black, 3–5-seeded berry 7–8 mm in diam. Widely cultivated ornamental that long per-
sists around old homesites and occasionally spreads to adjacent vegetation, wooded areas;
Grayson Co., also Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.). Native of Europe, w Asia, and n Africa.
This species can potentially damage trees by overtopping the foliage and stealing light, thus re-
ducing the tree’s photosynthetic output. There are numerous cultivars including variegated
forms. The juvenile stems bear lobed leaves in a single plane while the adult flowering stems
have unlobed leaves circling the stem (Graham 1966). The leaves and fruits contain the saponic
glycoside, hederagenin, which if ingested can cause breathing difficulties and coma; the sap
can cause dermatitis with blistering and inflammation—this is apparently due to polyacetylene
compounds which are also present; gloves should be used when trimming the plant (Schmutz
& Hamilton 1979; Spoerke & Smolinske 1990; Turner & Szczawinski 1991). 9 I


  ARISTOLOCHIACEAE PIPEVINE OR BIRTHWORT FAMILY
AA medium-sized family of ca. 600 species in 5 genera (Barringer & Whittemore 1997); it con-
sists of herbs, shrubs, and lianas (= woody vines) and extends from the tropics to temperate ar-
eas, especially in the Americas; they are usually aromatic and contain alkaloids or aristolochic
acid; a number are cultivated for their unusual flower shapes. Some taxonomists refer to the
Aristolochiaceae as “paleoherbs” (a group including Aristolochiales, Piperales, and
Nymphaeales) and believe them to be an early branch off the evolutionary line leading to
monocots; this view is supported by characters such as the 3-merous flowers (Zomlefer 1994)
and molecular data which place the paleoherbs as the immediate sister group of the monocots
(Chase et al. (1993) (see Fig. 41 in Appendix 6). (subclass Magnolidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs or woody vines with alternate, simple, palmately
veined leaves often basally cordate to hastate or sagittate and apetalous flowers with a curved,
pipe-like, 3-merous calyx; fruit a capsule.
REFERENCES: Gregory 1956; Huber 1993; Barringer & Whittemore 1997.

                 ARISTOLOCHIA PIPEVINE, BIRTHWORT, TACOPATE
Herbs or woody vines; leaves alternate, simple; leaf blades entire, palmately veined, often cor-
date to hastate or sagittate at base; flowers in ours solitary in the leaf axils or in racemose inflo-
                                                                            ARISTOLOCHIA/ARISTOLOCHIACEAE           273

rescences from near the base of the plant, bisexual; calyces petaloid, curved, strikingly pipe-like
in shape; corollas absent; stamens in ours 6; fruit a capsule.
AA genus of ca. 300 (Barringer 1997) species of vines, scramblers, or herbs of tropical and
warm areas, especially the Americas; some flowers trap insects which then pollinate them; 9
all species contain alkaloids or aristolochic acid (carcinogenic and nephrotoxic—McGuffin et
al. 1997); some are used medicinally, in treating snakebites, or as an arrow poison. According to
Crosswhite and Crosswhite (1985), “Aristolochia was the source of the active ingredient in ‘sna-
keroot oil’ sold by itinerant snakeroot doctors who staged medicine shows in the western
United States in the Nineteenth Century.” The leaves of a number of species are eaten by larvae
of pipe-vine swallowtail butterflies such as Battus philenor; the aristolochic acid thus obtained
is sequestered and presumably makes them unpalatable to birds (Howe 1975; Barringer &
Whittemore 1997). (Greek, aristos, best, and lochia, delivery, from supposed value in aiding
childbirth; apparently derived through the ancient Doctrine of Signatures from the fancied re-
semblance of the flower bud to a fetus; the plants were used as a source of medicine to alleviate
the pain of childbirth—Pfeifer 1966)
REFERENCES: Pfeifer 1966; Barringer 1997.

1. High-climbing, twining, woody vines to 25 m long; flowers from leaf axils on upper part of the
   stem; leaves large, 8–15(–20) cm wide; seeds ca. 10 mm long                                            A. tomentosa
1. Erect to sprawling herbs to 60 cm tall; flowers on peduncles borne mostly at the base of the
   stems; leaf blades ca. 7 cm or less wide; seeds 5 mm or less long.
   2. Leaves subsessile, conspicuously clasping; leaf blades subcoriaceous, prominently reticulate
      veined beneath, obtuse to subacute at apex; stems with conspicuous spreading hairs                    A. reticulata
   2. Leaves with distinct petioles, not clasping; leaf blades thin, delicate, not prominently reticulate
      veined beneath, apically acuminate to acute; stems glabrous to with inconspicuous pu-
      bescence                                                                                            A. serpentaria

Aristolochia reticulata Jacq., (netted, in reference to the leaf venation), TEXAS DUTCHMAN’S-PIPE.
Perennial herb; stems to ca. 40 cm tall, ± zigzag; leaves few, subsessile, the petioles only 0.1–0.8
cm long; leaf blades oblong to broadly ovate, 7–12 cm long and 3–7 cm wide; inflorescences
racemose, several-flowered, arising from near base of plant (often covered by fallen leaves); pe-
rianth brownish purple; capsules subglobose, ca. 10–30 mm in diam. Wooded areas, sandy soils;
Young Co. (Pfeifer 1966) on w edge of nc TX; mainly e TX. May–Jul. The dried rhizome has been
sold as a serpentary (= treatment for snakebite); it is also used as a tonic; however, the active in-
gredient is aristolochic acid, a gastric irritant that in large doses can cause respiratory paralysis
(Barringer 1997). 9

Aristolochia serpentaria L., (referring to medicinal use for snakebite), VIRGINIA DUTCHMAN’S-PIPE,
VIRGINIA SNAKEROOT, NASH DUTCHMAN’S-PIPE. Perennial herb; stems to 60 cm tall; leaf blades
quite variable, ovate to narrowly lanceolate, cordate to hastate, sagittate, or truncate at base, 5–
15 cm long, 1–5 cm wide; petioles 0.5–3.5 cm long; flowers solitary, at the ends of scaly branches
arising from the lowest nodes of the stem; perianth purplish brown; capsules subglobose, 8–20
mm in diam. Moist wooded areas; Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997), also mapped
for e part of nc TX by Cheatham and Johnston (1995); also e TX and Edwards Plateau, and in s
OK just n of the Red River. [A. serpentaria var. hastata (Nutt.) Duch.] Even though it has distinc-
tive leaves, this is a small, easily overlooked plant of the forest floor. According to Barringer
(1997), closed, apparently cleistogamous flowers are often present. Also, this species exhibits a
great deal of variation in leaf shape; this variability is apparently related to the fact that eastern
pipe-vine swallowtail butterflies use leaf shape as a search image when looking for
Aristolochia leaves on which to lay their eggs (Barringer 1997). This species, which contains a
number of physiologically active components including aristolochine and aristolochic acid,
274   ASCLEPIADACEAE

was long used by Native Americans and early settlers for a variety of medicinal applications
including snakebite; it has been rather popular recently as an herbal medicine; however, it can
irritate the gastrointestinal tract and kidneys, and potentially cause coma and death due to res-
piratory paralysis (Duke 1985; Cheatham & Johnston 1995); aristolochic acid is carcinogenic
and nephrotoxic (McGuffin et al. 1997). 9

Aristolochia tomentosa Sims, (densely woolly, with matted hairs), WOOLLY DUTCHMAN ’S-PIPE,
PIPEVINE. Vine to 25 m long, densely pubescent except on old growth; leaf blades cordate, 3-
ribbed from base; petioles 1–5.5(–9) cm long; flowers solitary (rarely paired), axillary; perianth
green or yellowish green with brown or purplish stripes inside, with curved, funnelform tube
abruptly inflated above the ovary, and flaring limb; stamens 6, united with style; anthers
sessile; pistil 1; ovary appearing inferior (tightly enclosed by base of perianth tube); fruit a cy-
lindric capsule to 8 cm long and 3 cm in diam.; seeds flat, triangular. Thickets and woods, sandy
or silty soils, frequent, but not often found in flower; Denton, Grayson, Hood, Somervell, Tar-
rant, and Wise cos., also Dallas Co. (Pfeifer 1966); se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers Apr. Pre-
sumably contains aristolochic acid. 9

                ASCLEPIADACEAE MILKWEED FAMILY
Ours perennial herbs or twining vines, usually with milky juice; leaves usually opposite or
whorled or alternate, simple, entire or undulate; flowers axillary or terminal, solitary, in umbels,
or umbel-like racemes; calyces deeply 5-lobed; corollas deeply 5-lobed; crown (= corona) of
various sorts (e.g., disk-like, inflated, flat, stamen-like—often called hoods; sometimes very con-
spicuous) present around base of the short stamen-tube; stamens 5, the filaments united (ex-
cept in Periploca), the anthers large, united to form an anther head enclosing the two pistils (the
combined column-like or disk-like structure made up of the stamens and pistils is called the
gynostegium); anthers usually with a terminal outgrowth of the connective called an anther
appendage and with lateral wing-like margins (= anther wings); anther wings from adjacent
anthers are positioned close together and thus form a slit-like opening or groove between them
(through which the legs or other appendages of pollinators can fit); pollen grains coherent in a
mass (= pollinium) (except in Periploca); the 2 pollinia from adjacent anthers connected by a
wishbone-shaped structure (= translator); clip-like portion (= corpusculum) of translator at-
taches the pair of pollinia to the pollinator’s appendage as it is pulled out of the groove between
adjacent anthers (pollinia from other flowers can enter the groove and thus be brought into
contact with the enclosed stigmatic surfaces); pistils 2, united only by styles and/or stigmas;
fruit of follicles; seeds numerous, usually comose.
AA large (2,900 species in 315 genera), mainly tropical and warm area family with a few in
temperate regions; it consists of herbs to shrubs, trees, vines, and cactus-like succulents; the
family contains a number of ornamentals including Hoya (WAX PLANT) and Stapelia (CARRION-
FLOWER—with flesh-like, foul-smelling flowers that attract carrion flies which serve as pollina-
tors). 9 There are laticifers throughout and the milky sap often contains alkaloids or other
toxins such as glycosides; as a result they are avoided by most animals. However, members of
the Danaidae (milkweed butterflies such as the monarch) as larvae feed primarily on members
of the Asclepiadaceae and as a result are distasteful to predators (Howe 1975) due to the seques-
tered toxins. Asclepiadaceae typically have a specialized insect pollination mechanism in
which the pollinia become attached to the legs of insects which have been guided into position
by grooves or slits in the gynostegium (Macior 1965; Bookman 1981); some species have ex-
tremely unpleasant odors (carrion smells) and are pollinated by flesh-flies. The MILKWEEDS are
closely related to the Apocynaceae and appear to represent a clade within that family (the rela-
tionship can be seen in the shared milky sap and pistils united only by styles and/or stigmas).
From a cladistic standpoint the two families should be lumped to form a more inclusive mono-
                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS            275




                                                                       Aristolochia serpentaria [AMB, ST2]
     Aristolochia reticulata [AMB]




                                                                                     Asclepias amplexicaulis [AMB, BT 3]


         Aristolochia tomentosa [AMB, BB2]




Asclepias arenaria [AMB, BB2]           Asclepias asperula subsp. capricornu [AMB, BT3]       Asclepias engelmanniana [AMB, SHI]
276   ASCLEPIADACEAE/ASCLEPIAS

phyletic Apocynaceae (Judd et al. 1994); Liede (1997), for example, treated the family as subfam-
ily Asclepiadoideae in the Apocynaceae. (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs or vines usually with milky sap, frequently opposite
leaves, flowers with a distinctive corona and a gynostegium(= combined structure composed of
stamens and pistil), and wind-dispersed seeds with a tuft of long silky hairs. Similar to
Apocynaceae (e.g., herbs or vines with milky sap and often opposite leaves) but that family has
flowers without corona or gynostegium.
REFERENCES: Woodson 1941; Shinners 1964b; Bookman 1981; Hartman 1986; Rosatti 1989; Judd
et al. 1994; Liede & Albers 1994; Liede 1997.

1. Central column of flower surrounded by 5 separate, fleshy-inflated or fleshy-thickened, erect or
   spreading stamen-like appendages (= hoods).
   2. Stems not twining, the plants erect to prostrate herbs; corollas without a fleshy disk at base
      under the separate appendages; corolla appendages usually with an internal horn or crest
      (horn or crest absent in a few species)                                                              Asclepias
   2. Stems twining, at least towards the tip, the plants vines; corollas with a fleshy disk at base
      under the appendages; corolla appendages without internal horn or crest                             Funastrum
1. Central column of flower or its base with 1 or 2 rows of flat thin appendages OR with a single,
   entire or lobed, fleshy disk or cup.
   3. Plants woody nearly throughout; leaf bases acute to broadly rounded; introduced species              Periploca
                                                                                                                   a
   3. Plants herbaceous or woody only in lower half; leaf bases cordate (in nc TX species); native
      species.
      4. Flowers brownish to purple to green; corolla lobes spreading or ascending, not erect; open
         flowers ca. 8–15 mm across; corolla appendages thin and flat, in 2 rows OR flower with a
         single, entire or lobed, fleshy disk or cup                                                        Matelea
      4. Flowers white to cream or greenish white; corolla lobes erect, the tips spreading; open flowers
         ca. 6–8 mm across; corolla appendages thin and flat, in 1 row                                   Cynanchum

                               ASCLEPIAS MILKWEED, SILKWEED
Perennial herbs; stems erect to reclining; leaves alternate, opposite, or whorled, sessile or peti-
oled; flowers in terminal or lateral umbels; corollas becoming reflexed or shallowly campanu-
late; hoods with or without an exserted appendage (= horn).
AA genus of 100 species of the Americas, especially the United States; some are cultivated as
ornamentals; others have been used medicinally since early times. 9 Many if not most species
are poisonous; however, all species are distasteful to livestock and severe losses usually occur
only when animals are forced to eat the plants. Abundant MILKWEEDS in a pasture are often a
sign of severe overgrazing. The poisonous principles include resinoids, cardiac glycosides, and
alkaloids; the milky latex can cause dermatitis in susceptible individuals (Kingsbury 1964;
Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977; Turner & Szczawinski 1991). Monarch butterflies (Danaus
plexippus) feed as larvae on Asclepias species and obtain cardiac glycosides which provide
them with protection from bird predators; the butterflies are poisonous only if they fed on poi-
sonous plants as larvae (Scott 1986). The long silky hairs on the seeds were formerly used in
making candle wicks (Ajilvsgi 1984). (Named from Greek Asklepios, god of medicine, alluding
to its medicinal properties)
REFERENCES: Woodson 1947, 1953, 1954, 1962; Edwards & Wyatt 1994.

1. Leaf blades linear or narrowly linear-lanceolate, 1–5 mm wide.
   2. Leaves mostly in whorls of 3 or 4                                                            A. verticillata
   2. Leaves opposite or alternate.
      3. Leaves drooping, usually 10–18 cm long; plants 0.6–1.2(–1.4) m tall; hoods without horns
                                                                                              A. engelmanniana
                                                                                      ASCLEPIAS /ASCLEPIADACEAE         277

     3. Leaves not drooping, 3–14 cm long; plants to 0.8 m tall; hoods with horns, the horns free for
        much of their length and longer than the hood bodies or adnate with hood bodies and
        visible as the middle lobe of the hoods.
        4. Leaves opposite; rootstock of numerous thin segments ca. 1–2 mm thick; leaf blades 3–
           6(–9) cm long; horns free for much of their length and longer than the hood bodies
                                                                                                                 A. linearis
         4. Leaves alternate; rootstock thickly tuberous (to ca. 15 mm thick); leaf blades usually 6–
         14(–18) cm long; horns adnate and visible as the middle lobe of the hoods                         A. stenophylla
1. Leaf blades lanceolate to oblong-orbicular, mostly over 8 mm wide.
   5. Leaves opposite.
      6. Umbels terminating the stems or some in upper leaf axils, held erect.
         7. Corollas greenish, tinged with rose or purple; umbels long-peduncled, the peduncle
            greatly exceeding the upper leaves; leaf apex obtuse to rounded, mucronate                  A. amplexicaulis
         7. Corollas white, white tinged with pink, or bright pink; peduncles various; leaf apex acumi-
            nate to broadly acute (rarely rounded).
            8. Leaf blades 4–9 cm wide, broadly oval; corollas white, the lobes 4.5–8 mm long                 A. variegata
            8. Leaf blades 4 cm or less wide, oval, ovate-elliptic, narrowly oblong to linear-lanceolate;
               corollas white to bright pink, the lobes 3–4 mm long.
               9. Corollas usually bright pink (rarely white); larger leaf blades often abruptly narrowed
                  or truncate basally; stems stout, 0.4–1.5(–2.5) m tall; inflorescences usually paired at
                  upper nodes                                                                                 A. incarnata
               9. Corollas white, sometimes tinted with pale pink; larger leaf blades gradually or
                  abruptly narrowed basally; stems slender, 0.3–0.6 m tall; inflorescences solitary at
                  upper nodes.
                  10. Follicles pendulous; seeds naked, without a coma; leaf blades narrowly lanceolate
                      to lanceolate, to 15(–20) mm wide; mostly in low swampy areas in se and e TX, in
                      nc TX known only from Dallas Co.                                                         A. perennis
                  10. Follicles erect on erect pedicels; seeds with a coma of hairs to ca. 20 mm long;
                      leaf blades lanceolate to broadly ovate, to 35 mm wide; mostly in rocky shaded
                      areas in c TX; in nc TX known only from s margin of area                                   A. texana
      6. Umbels lateral, in leaf axils (but often in upper axils), held in a horizontal or oblique manner.
         11. Calyx lobes, pedicels, and sometimes even stems and lower surface of leaf blades con-
              spicuously and ± densely white tomentulose                                                       A. arenaria
         11. Calyx lobes, pedicels, and sometimes even stems and lower surface of leaf blades glabrate
              to puberulent, but not white tomentulose.
              12. Pedicels 15–25 mm long; leaves petiolate, the petioles 5–25 mm long; corolla lobes
                   8–14 mm long; hoods with horns                                                      A. oenotheroides
              12. Pedicels 5–15(–20) mm long; leaves sessile or petioles to about 5(–7) mm long;
                   corolla lobes 6–7 mm long; hoods without horns                                            A. viridiflora a
   5. Leaves, except lowest, alternate.
      13. Stems pilose; corollas yellow, orange, or red; hoods with horns; plants without milky latex
                                                                                                               A. tuberosa
      13. Stems glabrous or short pubescent; corollas green to white; hoods without horns; plants
           with milky latex; (previously segregated as genus Asclepiodora).
           14. Corolla lobes 7–12 mm long; leaf blades 1–3 cm wide, narrowly oblong- or ovate-
                lanceolate, the apex narrowly acuminate; anther head much wider than tall                      A. asperula
           14. Corolla lobes 13–17 mm long; leaf blades 1.5–6 cm wide, broadly oblong to ovate, the
                apex usually obtuse to acute; anther head ca. as wide as tall                                      A. viridis

Asclepias amplexicaulis Sm., (clasping the stem), BLUNT-LEAF MILKWEED. Plant glabrous; stems
erect, (20–)40–80(–100) cm tall; upper leaves sessile, clasping; leaf blades ovate to elliptic-ob-
278   ASCLEPIADACEAE/ASCLEPIAS

long, 4–12 cm long, 1.8–8 cm wide, apically obtuse to rounded and often mucronate; corolla
lobes greenish, tinged with rose or purple; gynostegium pale purple or rose; hoods with horns.
Sandy open woods, roadsides, and old fields; Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant cos., also Lamar Co.
(Carr 1994); se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. May.

Asclepias arenaria Torr., (of sand), SAND MILKWEED. Stems solitary, 20–50(–80+) cm tall, pubes-
cent; leaf blades ca. 5–10 cm long, 3–8 cm wide; petioles usually 10–18 mm long; corolla lobes
pale green, 7.5–11 mm long; gynostegium white to cream; hoods with horns. Sandy soils, road-
sides; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly w
1/2 of TX and s part of the state. Jun–Sep.

Asclepias asperula (Decne.) Woodson subsp. capricornu (Woodson) Woodson, (sp.: rough;
subsp.: like a goat’s horn), ANTELOPE-HORNS, TRAILING MILKWEED. Stems partly decumbent or
low-spreading, 10–60 cm long, minutely pubescent or largely glabrous; petioles 2–7 mm long;
corolla lobes pale yellowish green, sometimes purple-tinged; gynostegium greenish cream to
dark purple; hoods widespreading, without horns. Rocky or sandy prairies; Blackland Prairie w
to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun, sporadically through summer, fall. [A. asperula
(Decne.) Woodson var. decumbens (Nutt.) Shinners, A. capricornu Woodson, Asclepiodora
decumbens (Nutt.) A. Gray] The common name ANTELOPE-HORNS is said to come from the
curved fruits (Kirkpatrick 1992). Reportedly poisonous to livestock (Hartman 1986). 9 m/79

Asclepias engelmanniana Woodson, (for George Engelmann, 1809–1884, German-born botanist
and physician of St. Louis), ENGELMANN’S MILKWEED. Stems (30–)60–120(–140) cm tall, glabrous
or nearly so; leaf blades sessile, linear, usually 10–20 cm long, 1–3(–5) mm wide; corolla lobes
pale green, purple-tinged; gynostegium yellowish; hoods without horns. Sandy or rocky
ground; Brown, Collin, Cooke, Jack, and Tarrant cos., also Hamilton (HPC), Palo Pinto, Somervell
(Woodson 1954) cos.; w 2/3 of TX. May–Sep.

Asclepias incarnata L., (flesh-colored), SWAMP MILKWEED. Stems erect, usually (40–)70–150(–
250) cm tall; leaf blades linear-lanceolate to lanceolate or ovate-elliptic, (3–)5–15 cm long, to ca.
4 cm wide; petioles 3–10(–17) mm long; corolla lobes bright pink (rarely white); gynostegium
pale pink (rarely white); hoods with horns. Wet ground. May–Oct.

1. Plants glabrous or nearly so                                                      subsp. incarnata
1. Plants pubescent                                                                    subsp. pulchra

subsp. incarnata. Dallas Co. (found by Reverchon at Buzzards Spring, not seen recently), also
Hood Co. (Woodson 1954); nc TX w through much of w 1/2 of TX.

subsp. pulchra (Ehrh. ex Willd.) Woodson, (handsome). Indicated by Woodson (1954) to be in-
troduced in nc TX (mapped apparently as Tarrant Co.). [A. incarnata L. var. pulchra (Ehrh. ex
Willd.) Pers.]

Asclepias linearis Scheele, (narrow, with sides nearly paralled), SLIM MILKWEED. Stems erect, usu-
ally 20–50 cm tall, glabrous or inconspicuously pubescent; leaves sessile or subsessile; leaf
blades linear, 1–4 mm wide; umbels axillary on upper part of stem; corolla lobes greenish white
(rarely brownish or purplish); gynostegium white; hoods with horns. Dry prairies; collected at
Buzzards Spring, Dallas, in October 1902 by Reverchon (Mahler 1988), also Milam Co.
(Woodson 1954); endemic to TX from coast n to Dallas Co. May–Oct. E

Asclepias oenotheroides Cham. & Schltdl., (resembling Oenothera—evening primrose), SIDE-
CLUSTER MILKWEED, HIERBA DE ZIZOTES. Stems erect or spreading, 10–45 cm long, minutely sca-
brous-pubescent; leaf blades oblong-lanceolate to elliptic, 2.5–12 cm long, 1.5–6 cm wide; peti-
oles 5–25 mm long; corolla lobes greenish white to yellow, gynostegium pale greenish cream;
hoods with horns. Sandy or gravelly ground, especially disturbed places; Clay, McLennan,
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS                279




                                   Asclepias incarnata subsp. incarnata [AMB, COR]     Asclepias incarnata subsp. pulchra [BB2]




 Asclepias linearis [AMB, HEA]     Asclepias oenotheroides [AMB, HEA]                    Asclepias perennis [AMB, CO1]




Asclepias stenophylla [AMB, BB2]              Asclepias texana [FMC]                 Asclepias tuberosa subsp. interior [AMB, BT3]
280   ASCLEPIADACEAE/ASCLEPIAS

Somervell, Tarrant, and Wise cos., also Brown, Comanche, Hamilton (HPC), Bell, and Dallas
(Woodson 1954) cos.; mainly the w 2/3 of TX. May–Oct.

Asclepias perennis Walter, (perennial), SHORE MILKWEED, THIN-LEAF MILKWEED. Stems erect, 30–
50 cm tall; plant glabrous except for upper stem, peduncles, and pedicels; leaf blades narrowly
to broadly lanceolate, 5–14 cm long, to 15(–20) mm wide; petioles to 15 mm long; corolla lobes
white, usually suffused with pale pink or lavender; gynostegium white; hoods with horns;
seeds ca. 15 mm long. Damp woods, swampy areas; collected by Reverchon at Dallas, not found
there recently (Mahler 1988); mainly se and e TX. Jun–Jul. According to Woodson (1954), the
pendulous follicles and large naked seeds may be adaptations to dispersal by water. Woodson
(1954) indicated that he could not distinguish this species from A. texana except by the strik-
ingly different fruit and seed, and the geographical distribution.

Asclepias stenophylla A. Gray, (narrow-leaved), SLIM-LEAF MILKWEED, NARROW-LEAF MILKWEED.
Plant superficially resembling A. verticillata, densely pubescent above, with larger corollas;
stems erect, 20–80(–100) cm tall, minutely puberulent to glabrate; leaves sessile; leaf blades
usually 6–14(–18) cm long; corolla lobes pale greenish cream or yellow, ca. 6 mm long;
gynostegium pale greenish cream or white; hoods 3–4 mm long, with horns. Prairies or open
ground; Cooke, Grayson, and McLennan cos., also Henderson and Tarrant cos. (Woodson 1954);
se and e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Jun–Aug.

Asclepias texana A. Heller, (of Texas), TEXAS MILKWEED. Stems erect, to ca. 50 cm tall, with incon-
spicuous pubescence in lines; leaf blades lanceolate to broadly ovate, 20–70 cm long, to 35 mm
wide; inflorescences solitary at the uppermost nodes; flowers showy; corolla lobes white, ca. 3
mm long; gynostegium white; hoods with horns; follicles erect, 9–12 cm long; seeds ca. 8 mm
long, with a white coma to ca. 20 mm long. Rocky shaded areas; Burnet Co. on the very s mar-
gin of nc TX (Balcones Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife Refuge, C. Sexton, pers. comm.), also Travis
Co. just s of nc TX; mainly Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Jun–Aug.

Asclepias tuberosa L. subsp. interior Woodson, (sp.: tuberous; subsp.: presumably referring to its
range in the interior of the North American continent), BUTTERFLY-WEED, BUTTERFLY MILKWEED,
ORANGE MILKWEED, CHIGGER-FLOWER, CHIGGERWEED, PLEURISY-ROOT. Plant without milky latex;
stems spreading to erect, to 90 cm long, pilose; leaves many, crowded, oblong-lanceolate, usu-
ally 3–12 cm long, to 23(–30) mm wide, ± sessile and clasping or petioles to 5 mm long; corolla
lobes usually orange (rarely yellowish or reddish); gynostegium usually orange, occasionally
yellowish; hoods with horns. Sandy open woods or occasionally silty clay prairies; throughout
TX, more in e 2/3 of the state. May–Jul. [A. tuberosa L. subsp. terminalis Woodson] Reportedly
poisonsous to livestock (Hartman 1986). 9 m/79

Asclepias variegata L., (variegated, irregularly colored), WHITE-FLOWER MILKWEED. Plant gla-
brous except for upper stem, peduncles, and pedicels; stems erect, (20–)30–120 cm tall; leaf
blades oblong-lanceolate to suborbicular, 5–15 cm long, 4–9 cm wide; petioles 10–20 mm long;
corolla lobes white; gynostegium white except for purplish column; hoods with short horns.
Sandy woods; found by Reverchon at Dallas, not seen there recently (Mahler 1988); mainly e
TX. Apr–Jun. m/79

Asclepias verticillata L., (whorled), WHORLED MILKWEED, EASTERN WHORLED MILKWEED. Stems
erect, usually 30–90 cm tall, puberulent in lines; leaves mostly in whorls; leaves sessile or nearly
so; leaf blades filiform to linear, (1.5–)3–8 cm long, 0.5–2(–3) mm wide, often revolute; corolla
lobes greenish white, sometimes with a hint of purple, ca. 3.5 mm long; gynostegium greenish
white; hoods ca. 1.5 mm long, with horns. Sandy open woods, rocky slopes, or prairies; se and e
TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau, also Trans-Pecos. May–Jul, sporadically later.
Reported to be poisonous to livestock (Hartman 1986). 9
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS           281




                        Asclepias variegata [AMB, BTE]
                                                                                           Asclepias verticillata [REE]




                    Asclepias viridiflora [AMB, BT3]
                                                                               Asclepias viridis [AMB, STE]




Cynanchum barbigerum [HEA]                       Cynanchum laeve [BB2]     Cynanchum racemosum var. unifarium [JAC , TOR]
282   ASCLEPIADACEAE/CYNANCHUM

Asclepias viridiflora Raf., (green-flowered), GREEN-FLOWER MILKWEED, GREEN ANTELOPE-HORNS,
WAND MILKWEED. Stems erect, usually 20–80(–100) cm tall, glabrous or densely and finely pu-
bescent; leaves sessile or petioles to about 5(–7) mm long; leaf blades quite variable, from nar-
rowly lanceolate to oblong-obovate or suborbicular, 4–13(–14) cm long, 1–5(–6) cm wide; corolla
lobes and gynostegium pale green; hoods without horns. Sandy or calcareous areas, gravelly open
ground, or prairies; throughout TX. Jun–Aug. [A. viridiflora Raf. var. lanceolata Torr.] m/79

Asclepias viridis Walter, (green), GREEN MILKWEED, ANTELOPE-HORNS. Plant glabrous or upper stem
and young leaves minutely pubescent; stems low-spreading to suberect, usually 25–60 cm long;
leaf blades broadly oblong to ovate, 4–13 cm long, 1.5–6 cm wide; petioles 3–10 mm long; corolla
lobes pale green; gynostegium pale purplish rose; hoods wide-spreading, without horns. Prairies,
ditch banks, pastures, and disturbed ground; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards
Plateau. Apr–Jun, sporadically in summer and fall. [Asclepiodora viridis (Walter) A. Gray] Prob-
ably the most common milkweed in nc TX; sometimes extremely abundant in overgrazed pastures.

                                CYNANCHUM SWALLOW-WORT
Twining vines to 3 m or more long; leaves opposite, petioled, basally cordate; inflorescences ax-
illary; follicles lanceolate in outline, smooth.

AA genus of 200 species of tropical and warm areas of the world. (Greek: cyon, dog, and
anchein, to strangle; an ancient name for some plant supposedly poisonous to dogs)
REFERENCE: Sundell 1981.

1. Leaf blades < 10(–12) mm wide, with broadly rounded base, not cordate; petioles usually 1–4(–8)
   mm long; rare on s edge of nc TX                                                                C. barbigerum
1. Leaf blades 10–70 mm wide, cordate at base; petioles to 50(–90) mm long; widespread in nc TX.
   2. Petals ca. 6–7 mm long; peduncle mostly shorter than petiole of subtending leaf; corolla ap-
      pendages nearly as long as the corolla, deeply divided into linear segments                         C. laeve
                                                                                                                 e
   2. Petals ca. 3.5 mm long; peduncle about as long as or longer than petiole of subtending leaf;
      corolla appendages < 2/3 as long as the corolla, broadly oblong with toothed or lobed summit
                                                                                                   C. racemosum

Cynanchum barbigerum (Scheele) Shinners, (bearded, presumably in reference to the densely
long pilose inner surfaces of the corolla lobes), BEARDED SWALLOW-WORT, THICKET THREADVINE.
Leaf blades linear to linear-oblong or elliptic-lanceolate, to 5 cm long, usually shorter; flowers
white or creamy white, in umbellate clusters of 5 or fewer; corollas 3.6–5.2 mm long; corolla
lobes strongly recurved above middle; follicles to 5 cm long. In open rocky areas and on herbs
and shrubs; Burnet Co. (Balcones Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife Refuge, C. Sexton, pers. comm.) on
s margin of nc TX s to s TX and w to Trans-Pecos. May–Jul. [Metastelma barbigerum Scheele]

Cynanchum laeve (Michx.) Pers., (smooth), BLUEVINE, SANDVINE , SMOOTH SWALLOW-WORT,
SMOOTH ANGLEPOD. Leaf blades triangular-lanceolate to deltoid; petioles to 45(–90) mm long;
flowers white, in peduncled umbellate clusters or abbreviated racemes; follicles to 15 cm long.
Low moist woods or fields; Cooke, Collin, Dallas, Grayson, Hill, Hood, Palo Pinto, and Tarrant
cos., also Brown Co. (HPC); in much of the e 1/2 of TX. Aug–Sep.

Cynanchum racemosum (Jacq.) Jacq. var. unifarium (Scheele) Sundell, (sp.: with flowers in
racemes; var.: of a single rank or series), TALAYOTE. Leaf blades broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate
or triangular-lanceolate with stipule-like small leaves from leaf axils; petioles to 50 mm long;
flowers cream or greenish white, in racemes; follicles to 10 cm long. Sandy forests and thickets;
Palo Pinto and Tarrant (Fort Worth Nature Center) cos.; also Parker Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.);
also Edwards Plateau, s TX, and Trans-Pecos. May–Oct. [C. unifarium (Scheele) Woodson]
                                                                             FUNASTRUM/ASCLEPIADACEAE          283

                                     FUNASTRUM TWINEVINE
Twining vines; leaves opposite, petioled, with cordate bases; inflorescences of peduncled, um-
bellate clusters in leaf axils; follicles smooth, fusiform, not angled.
AThe species here treated in Funastrum have traditionally been placed in Sarcostemma (e.g.,
Correll & Johnston 1970; Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997), a genus in the broad sense of ca. 40
species of leafy or leafless vines with photosynthetically active stems (Liede 1996); it is native
to tropical and warm areas of the world. Based on a cladistic analysis, Liede (1996) argued con-
vincingly that Sarcostemma be restricted to Old World taxa, while the ca. 15 species in the New
World be recognized in Funastrum; the similar floral structures of the 2 groups are interpreted
as parallel evolution. We are following Liede (1996) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in recog-
nizing Funastrum. (Greek: funis, rope, presumably in reference to the vine habit)
REFERENCES: Holm 1950; Jones & Jones 1991; Liede 1996.

1. Leaf margins distinctly crisped or ruffled; corollas brownish green or bronze; calyx lobes mostly
   > 3 times as long as wide                                                                             F. crispum
1. Leaf margins neither crisped nor ruffled; corollas white to pale lavender or pinkish; calyx lobes
   mostly < 3 times as long as wide                                                                F. cynanchoides

Funastrum crispum (Benth.) Schltr., (crisped, curled), WAVY-LEAF TWINEVINE, WAVY-LEAF
MILKWEEDVINE. Glabrous, low-climbing or tangle-forming vine; leaf blades narrowly triangular
and elongate to linear, acuminate, blue-green, with ruffled, occasionally purple-tinged margin;
calyx lobes 3–6 mm long, narrowly lanceolate; follicles to 12 cm long. In gravelly or silty lime-
stone soils; Dallas (Reverchon in “light soil, West Dallas”), McLennan, and Palo Pinto cos., also
Callahan, Dallas (Holm 1950), Johnson, Parker, and Tarrant (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; nc TX
s and w to Trans-Pecos. May–Aug. [Sarcostemma crispum Benth.] m/90

Funastrum cynanchoides (Decne.) Schltr., (resembling Cynanchum—swallow-wort), CLIMBING-
MILKWEED, TWINEVINE, WHITE TWINEVINE. Glabrous to sparsely puberulent twining to trailing
vine; leaves broadly to narrowly ovate-lanceolate to triangular-lanceolate, acute to acuminate,
foliage with noticably very unpleasant odor; calyx lobes 2–3 mm long, ovate to ovate-linear; fol-
licles to 7 cm long. Sandy or rocky soils, waste places; Grayson and Lamar cos., also Archer,
Brown, Young (Holm 1950), and Tarrant (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; mainly w 1/2 of TX. Apr–
Sep. [Sarcostemma cynanchoides Decne.] m/90

                                MATELEA MILKVINE, ANGLEPOD
Plants variously pubescent or pilose, often with burned-rubber odor; stems trailing to suberect,
or twining and climbing; leaves opposite, short- to rather long-petioled; leaf blades ovate to ob-
long-ovate, with cordate base; flowers axillary; corollas rotate; follicles smooth or with spine-
like tubercules, angled or not.
AA genus of 180 species native to tropical and temperate regions of the New World. (Deriva-
tion of generic name not explained by original author)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1950b; Correll 1965.

1. Flowers in peduncled, axillary, several- or many-flowered umbels or umbel-like racemes; stems
   twining or climbing; leaf blades to 17 cm long, typically > 6 cm.
   2. Corollas greenish brown to brownish purple, without a network of fine veins on the upper
      surface, the lobes linear-oblong or linear-lanceolate; fruits smooth OR with sharp, spike-like
      tubercles.
      3. Plants without glandular puberulence; sepals glabrous or ciliate only at apex; peduncle of
         inflorescence ca. the same length as pedicels; fruits smooth; widespread in nc TX           M. gonocarpos
284   ASCLEPIADACEAE/MATELEA

      3. Plants minutely glandular-puberulent; sepals pubescent; peduncle of inflorescence much
         longer than pedicels; fruits with sharp, spine-like tubercles; e margin of nc TX                M. decipiens
   2. Corollas green, with a network of fine veins on at least part of the upper surface, the lobes
      ovate-lanceolate or elliptic; fruits with sharp spine-like tubercules.
      4. Upper surface of corollas densely puberulent; only distal part of upper surface of corolla
         lobes with network of fine veins (with dark green parallel veins below middle); stems and
         leaves with only sparse short pubescence of curved or appressed hairs; leaves without a
         strong bad odor; crown (= corona of flower) with 5 short, distinct, rounded, spreading ap-
         pendages; peduncles to 12 mm long, shorter than the subtending petiole; in nc TX known
         only from Dallas Co.                                                                        M. edwardsensis
      4. Upper surface of corollas glabrous; entire upper surface of corollas with network of fine
         veins; stems and leaves with both long spreading hairs and short glandular hairs; leaves
         with a strong bad odor; crown without 5 distinct appendages; peduncles usually as long as
         or longer than the subtending petiole; scattered in nc TX                                       M. reticulata
1. Flowers mostly in 2s, with pedicels attached directly in leaf axils; stems trailing to suberect, not
   twining; leaf blades 5(–6.5) cm or less long, often much less.
   5. Pedicels shorter than adjacent petioles; corolla lobes 4–7 mm long, dark red-brown or purple
      brown                                                                                                  M. bifloraa
   5. Pedicels when fully expanded longer than adjacent petioles; corolla lobes 2–4 mm long, dark
      greenish brown                                                                                 M. cynanchoides

Matelea biflora (Raf.) Woodson, (two-flowered), TWO-FLOWER MILKVINE. Plant usually trailing;
stems 10–40 cm long. Praires or open ground, usually limestone areas; Blackland Prairie w to
Rolling Plains, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun, occasionally in fall. m/98

Matelea cynanchoides (Engelm.) Woodson, (resembling Cynanchum—swallow-wort), MILKVINE.
Plant with odor like that of burned rubber, usually ascending to suberect; stems 15–50 cm long.
Loose sandy soils, open oak woods; Montague, Navarro, Parker, Tarrant, and Young cos.; se and e
TX w to Edwards Plateau and Rolling Plains. Apr–Aug.

Matelea decipiens (Alexander) Woodson, (deceptive, not obvious), CLIMBING-MILKWEED. Plant
climbing on other plants, with spreading pubescence (hairs 1–2 mm long) and minute glandu-
lar puberulence; petioles ca. equal in length to inflorescences; flowers 5–25 per inflorescence;
calyx lobes with short pubescence; corollas brownish purple; corolla lobes to 15 mm long; fruits
somewhat angled. Sandy soils, wooded areas; Grayson and Henderson cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr
1994); mainly se and e TX. Apr–Jun. [Gonolobusdecipiens (Alexander) L.M. Perry] A revision
currently in progress may separate this species into the genus Gonolobus.

Matelea edwardsensis Correll, (of the Edwards Plateau), PLATEAU MILKVINE. Plant climbing on
other plants; leaf blades to 7.5 cm long and 7 cm wide; petioles to 6 cm long; pedicels to ca. 10
mm long; calyx pubescence short; calyx lobes ca. 3 mm long; corolla lobes ca. 8 mm long and
4 mm wide; fruits ca. 9–10 cm long. On limestone, open woods; Dallas Co. (Cedar Hill State
Park—collected by Paul Baldon), also Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); otherwise
known only from a few counties on the Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Apr–May. E m/98

Matelea gonocarpos (Walter) Shinners, (angled-fruit), ANGLEPOD. Plant high-climbing, with
spreading pubescence (hairs ca. 1 mm long); leaf blades large, thin; petioles longer than inflo-
rescences; flowers 2–12 per inflorescence; corollas greenish brown to brownish purple; corolla
lobes to ca. 14 mm long; fruits smooth, sharply angled. Stream bottom woods; se and e TX w to
East Cross Timbers and Lampasas Cut Plain. May–Jun. [Gonolobus gonocarpus(Walter) L.M.
Perry] A revision currently in progress may separate this species into the genus Gonolobus.

Matelea reticulata (Engelm. ex A. Gray) Woodson, (netted) NET-VEIN MILKVINE, GREEN MILK-
                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   285




                           GYNOSTEGIUM




 Funastrum crispum [AMB, HEA]                                                               GYNOSTEGIUM


                                                                  Funastrum cynanchoides [AMB, HEA]




Matelea biflora [SHI]              Matelea cynanchoides [BT3]
                                                                                 Matelea decipiens [STE]




                                     Matelea edwardsensis [HEA]
286   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS




                    Matelea gonocarpa [BT3]




                                                                                                         Matelea reticulata [BT3]




                                                        Periploca graeca [LAM]




                                                                       C
                                                  B
                                                                                                          D
                               A



                                                                                                                                    E




                   F                                       H


                                      G
                                                                                             I


        ASTERACEAE FRUIT TYPES. A: Without pappus (e.g., Helianthus sp.); B: With pappus of 2, barbed awns (e.g., Bidens sp.);
        C: With dimorphic pappus: Inner long and outer short bristles (as in Heterotheca sp.); D: Ribbed with nearly uniform
        pappus bristles (e.g., Eupatorium sp.); E: Winged, with spinescent style (e.g., Soliva sp.); F: Ribbed, with pappus of 5
        awn-like scales (e.g., Ageratum sp.); G: With dimorphic pappus: bristles alternating with scales (e.g. Krigia sp.); H: With
        pappus bristles at the tip of the beak (e.g., Lactuca); I: Winged with pappus of 2 awns (e.g., Verbesina sp.). [GAN]
                                                                                  ASTERACEAE    287

WEEDVINE. Plant climbing on other plants, with long, spreading pubescence (hairs 1–2 mm long)
and minute glandular pubescence; petioles to 5.5 cm long; peduncle ca. as long as or exceeding
subtending petiole; inflorescences few-flowered; calyx pubescence long, the hairs ca. as long as
calyx lobes are wide; calyx lobes 3–4 mm long; corollas 10–15 mm across; fruits to 15 cm long.
Thickets on rocky hillsides; Bell, Burnet, Palo Pinto, and Parker cos., also Brown, Comanche,
Eastland (HPC), and Johnson (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; also c, s, and w TX. May. m/98

                                   PERIPLOCA SILKVINE
AA genus of 11 species native to the Mediterranean region, e Asia, and tropical Africa; some are
cultivated as ornamentals; others are used medicinally. Periploca is a member of the
Periplocoideae, a less specialized subfamily, in contrast to the rest of the members of the family
in North Central Texas which are in the Asclepiadoideae. (Greek: peri, around and ploke, twin-
ing, alluding to the climbing habit of some species)
REFERENCE: Venter & Verhoeven 1997.

Periploca graeca L., (of Greece), SILKVINE. Twining woody vine to 5 m long; leaves opposite, en-
tire, petiolate; flowers in long pedunculate terminal cymes; corollas brown-purple, rotate,
deeply lobed, densely villous in lines; corona a ring of 5 broad lobes, each alternating with a
filiform apically cleft lobe 5–10 mm tall; filaments distinct; follicles linear, smooth, not angled.
Cultivated and escapes; Dallas Co.; in TX apparently only known from the Blackland Prairie.
May. Introduced from se Europe and w Asia. I


            ASTERACEAE (COMPOSITAE) SUNFLOWER
                                   OR DAISY FAMILY
Annual or perennial herbs or more rarely shrubs; leaves basal, alternate, opposite, or whorled,
simple or compound, entire, toothed, or lobed, not stipulate (but small basal lobes sometimes
resemble stipules); inflorescence a single involucrate head, or several or many involucrate
heads in corymbs, racemes, or panicles, each head simulating a single flower; involucre of one
or more rows of separate or united bracts (termed phyllaries to avoid confusion with bracts on
peduncles) imitating sepals; flowers (= florets) without typical calyx, but commonly with
modified calyx of hairs, scales, or teeth (= pappus) on summit of the inferior ovary; corollas of
two basic types: disk, mainly tubular (varying from thread-like to tubular-funnelform or cam-
panulate with cylindrical basal tube), with 4 or 5 equal or unequal teeth or lobes; and ray, with
small basal tube and broad, strap-shaped main portion (= ligule); stamens none or 5, attached
inside the corolla tube; anthers separate or united into a ring; pistil 1; style 1, commonly with 2
branches; ovary inferior; fruit an achene (see various types on facing page).
AThe Asteraceae is one of the two largest families of flowering plants (Orchidaceae is the
other), containing ca. 21,000–25,000 species (22,750 species in 1,528 genera—Mabberley 1997). It
is a cosmopolitan family of mainly herbs to shrubs and is of significant economic importance
as a source of food plants (e.g., Lactuca—LETTUCE, Cynara scolymus L.—ARTICHOKE), oil (e.g.,
Helianthus—SUNFLOWER and Carthamus—SAFFLOWER), and numerous ornamentals (e.g., Aster,
Bidens, Cosmos, Dahlia , Helianthus, Tagetes—MARIGOLD). Many are weeds including Taraxacum
species (DANDELIONS) and Cirsium species (THISTLES); 9 in some parts of the world poisonous
species of Senecio are a major cause of livestock poisoning; wind-pollinated genera such as
Ambrosia (RAGWEED), Iva (SUMPWEED), and Artemisia (SAGEBRUSH), which produce large quan-
tities of allergenic pollen, are important causes of hay fever (Lewis et al. 1983). Cronquist (1981)
suggested that the evolutionary success of the family may be in part due to a diversified chemi-
cal defense system, including polyacetylenes and sesquiterpene lactones. The 351 species
288   ASTERACEAE

of Asteraceae found in OK make it the largest family in that state (Taylor & Taylor 1994) and
the 620 species (almost 13% of the TX flora) in TX likewise make it the largest TX family
(Hatch et al. 1990). The Asteraceae is also the largest family in the nc TX flora; the 263 species
represent nearly 12% of the 2,223 species known in nc TX. (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: usually herbs or rarely shurbs with a characteristic inflores-
cence: flowers in a compact head subtended by bracts (= phyllaries)—the inflorescence resem-
bling a single flower (the heads are often grouped together to form compound inflorescences);
corollas sympetalous, 5-merous; stamens united by their anthers; fruit a 1-seeded achene often
topped by a pappus of hairs, scales, or teeth.
REFERENCES: Rydberg 1914–1927; Sharp 1935; Solbrig 1963; Vuilleumier 1969a, 1973; Moore &
Frankton 1974; Carlquist 1976; Cronquist 1977, 1980, 1985; Gandhi & Thomas 1989; Scott 1990;
Jansen et al. 1991, 1992; Bremer 1994; Nesom 1994a; Taylor 1997; Arriagada & Miller 1997.


                      KEYS TO GENERA OF ASTERACEAE
         Modified from Keys to the Asteraceae of Oklahoma(Taylor 1997) contributed by

                               CONSTANCE E.S. TAYLOR (DUR)
                  ARTIFICIAL KEY TO THE GENERA OF ASTERACEAE
                       (For Technical Key to Tribes of Asteraceae see page 298)
1. Heads with only ray flowers (with strap-shaped ligules), these all perfect; plant sap usually milky
                                                                                Use Key to Lactuceae Tribee (page 306)
1. Heads with disk flowers (with tubular eligulate corollas); ray flowers present or absent at the
   margins of the heads, these pistillate or neutral; plant sap usually watery.
   2. Heads with ray flowers, the ligules evident.
      3. Rays yellow to orange, sometimes with reddish-brown, rusty-brown, or maroon at base.
         4. Receptacle chaffy, a bract associated with each flower, or with bristles.                           Key 1
         4. Receptacle naked                                                                                    Key 2
      3. Rays white, or pink, or lavender, or blue, or reddish purple.
         5. Pappus of capillary bristles                                                                        Key 3
         5. Pappus of awns, scales, scaly bristles, a minute crown, or absent.                                  Key 4
   2. Heads with only disk flowers or apparently so (ray flowers sometimes present with corollas
      inconspicuous or reduced to a ring or absent).
      6. Phyllaries with either hooked or straight spines or tubercles OR large teeth at edges, some-
         times united into a bur; leaves frequently also spiny; receptacle chaffy or bristly (COCKLEBURS,
         RAGWEEDS , THISTLES )                                                                                  Key 5
      6. Phyllaries without hooked or straight spines or tubercles or large teeth, not united into a
         bur; leaves not spiny; receptacle various.
         7. Disk flowers pink, blue, purple, green, white, or yellowish cream                                   Key 6
         7. Disk flowers yellow, reddish brown, rusty-brown, or maroon                                          Key 7

Key 1. Ray and disk flowers both present; ray flowers yellow to orange, sometimes with red-
dish brown or rusty-brown or maroon marks; receptacle chaffy.
1. Receptacle chaff bristly; pappus of awned scales, the awns ca. as long as the scale bodies             Gaillardia
1. Receptacle chaff of bracts, associated with each flower; pappus various.
   2. Disk flowers sterile; ray flowers only fertile and maturing achenes, these much larger than
      those of the sterile disk flowers.
      3. Ray achenes thick, rounded or weakly compressed, without wings; leaf blades usually ±
         palmately 3–5-lobed                                                                           Smallanthus
                                                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS                             289

                                        GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ASTERACEAE (COMPOSITAE) FAMILY [JEP]
                                                   lobe
                                                                      disk flowers
                                                                                              stigmatic           style appendage                       ray flowers
         ligulate flowers                                                                       surface
                                ligule                                                                         style branch                                                disk flowers
                                                   style                                                                             lobe
                                                   branch                                                     anther appendage

                                                         phyllary                                                 anthers
                            involucre                                                 involucre                   (fused)
                                                    style
phyllaries                                                                                                      corolla lobe
(in 2 series)                                      anther                                                                                      phyllary                   involucre
                     peduncle                      appendage                    peduncle
                                                                                                               style branch                                            peduncle
          ligulate flowers                         anthers                           disk flowers
                                                   (fused)                                                                                     ligule                 ray flowers
                                                                                           style
                                                                                           branch
                              ligule                                                                               corolla
                                                                                         corolla
                            pappus
                                                                                       pappus
phyllaries                  achene
                                                                                  chaff                           pappus
                                                    phyllary
  receptacle                                                                     achene                                                     phyllary                          ligule
                      peduncle
                                                                                                                   achene                         chaff
                                                         receptacle                                                                                                   disk flower
                                 achene                                        peduncle                                                        receptacle              peduncle

         LIGULATE HEAD                 LIGULATE FLOWER              DISCOID HEAD                    DISK FLOWER               RAY FLOWER                  RADIATE HEAD




                                                                                                                                 c




                                                                                                                                                        b
                                     Aa                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                  Ab




                                 B




                                                                                                                             C




                ASTERACEAE HEAD TYPES. Aa: Radiate head (e.g., Gallardia); Ab: Vertical section through radiate head; a: Receptacle;
                b: Disk flowers; c: Ray flowers; d: Phyllaries; B: Discoid head (e.g., Eupatorium); C: Ligulate head (e.g., Cichorium). [GAN]
290    ASTERACEAE

      3. Ray achenes strongly flattened, with or without wings; leaf blades pinnately lobed or unlobed.
         4. Achenes broadly winged.
            5. Ray flowers usually 5, in 1 row; phyllaries 8 to 10 in 2 rows, the outer row distinctly nar-
               rower; disks less than 1.5 cm wide; plants taprooted annuals up to 0.3(–0.65) m tall
                                                                                                              Lindheimeraa
           5. Ray flowers numerous, in 2 to 3 rows; phyllaries numerous, in several rows, ± similar
              except for size; disks (1.5–)2–3 cm wide; plants coarse perennials up to 2(–3) m tall
                                                                                                             Silphium
       4. Achenes not winged.
          6. Ray flowers with back of corolla having green, red, or maroon veins; leaves crenate,
             serrate, dentate, or lyrate-pinnatifid (in one species rare in nc TX), variously pubescent
             but not hispid; pappus none                                                                  Berlandieraa
          6. Ray flowers with back of corolla entirely yellow, without colored veins; leaves deeply
             pinnatifid, densely hispid; pappus of a few scales                                         Engelmannia
 2. Disk flowers fertile; ray flowers fertile or neutral.
    7. Receptacle columnar.
       8. Leaves opposite at base, may be alternate or opposite on upper stem.
          9. Plants creeping and rooting at the nodes, the flowering branches ascending; leaves
             neither connate-perfoliate nor pinnatifid; phyllaries linear, subequal; disks 4–9 mm wide
                                                                                                              Acmella
          9. Plants ± erect or ascending, not creeping, not rooting at the nodes; leaves either con-
             nate-perfoliate or pinnatifid; outer phyllaries ovate, foliaceous, much larger than inner
             phyllaries; disks > 10 mm wide                                                           Tetragonotheca a
       8. Leaves all alternate.
          10. Leaves simple, the blades entire or toothed.
              11. Leaves clasping; achenes terete                                                            Dracopis
              11. Leaves not clasping; achenes 4-angled                                                    Rudbeckia
          10. Leaves pinnately compound or deeply lobed                                                      Ratibida
    7. Receptacle flat, or convex, or very low conic.
       12. Leaf bases decurrent; middle and lower stems winged                                             Verbesina
       12. Leaf bases not decurrent; stems not winged.
           13. Phyllaries dimorphic, the inner longer and enclosing the head; the outer smaller,
                less conspicuous; achenes flattened parallel to the phyllaries (or rarely 4-angled in
                Bidens).
                14. Inner phyllaries united for up to 1/2 their length; disk corolla lobes often linear
                                                                                                         Thelesperma
                14. Phyllaries all separate or nearly so; disk corolla lobes triangular to ovate.
                    15. Pappus of 2(–4) rigid, retrorsely barbed awns                                           Bidens
                    15. Pappus of 2(–4) awns or teeth which are inconspicuously barbed or not
                         barbed OR pappus absent.
                         16. Inner phyllaries spreading at anthesis; achenes not winged and disk
                             corollas yellow                                                                    Bidens
                         16. Inner phyllaries tightly enclosing heads; achenes winged and all co-
                             rollas yellow OR if achenes not winged, then disk corollas reddish brown
                                                                                                            Coreopsis
           13. Phyllaries all similar, imbricate, or slightly unequal, but not dimorphic in 2 rows;
                achenes various.
                17. Leaves, including upper ones, mostly opposite.
                    18. Leaves linear, 10–30 mm long, to only ca. 2 mm wide; plants erect, 8–22
                         cm tall                                                                                Zinnia
                                                                                                  ASTERACEAE    291

                  18. Leaves larger, usually much so; plants either decumbent OR much greater
                      than 22 cm tall.
                      19. Plants decumbent, slender, 5–30 cm tall; ray flowers 3–8, with corollas 4
                          mm or less long; mainly a lawn weed                                          Calyptocarpus
                      19. Plants erect, coarse; much taller than 30 cm; ray flowers usually 8–nu-
                          merous, with corollas more than 4 mm long, usually much more; wide-
                          spread in native habitats.
                             20. Achenes not winged; ray flowers neutral, without styles and stig-
                                 mas; widespread in nc TX                                                 Helianthus
                             20. Achenes winged or with wing-like margins; ray flowers pistillate
                                 (fertile or infertile), with styles present; s and w parts of nc TX.
                                 21. Leaves with distinct petioles; petioles with conspicuous auricles
                                     basally; pappus of 2 short awns, usually absent on mature
                                     achenes plants; plants perennial herbs                                   Simsia
                                 21. Leaves sessile; auricles lacking; pappus of 2 or 3 short awns
                                     subtended by short, hyaline scales; plants small shrubs                 Wedelia
                 17. Upper leaves alternate.
                     22. Achenes winged; petioles auriculate dilated at base OR not so                     Verbesina
                     22. Achenes not winged; petioles not auriculate.
                         23. Ray flowers neutral, without styles and stigmas; pappus of 2 awns, these
                             stout and early deciduous; squamellae lacking; widespread in nc TX
                                                                                                          Helianthus
                         23. Ray flowers pistillate (but infertile), with styles present; pappus of 2
                             slender and persistent awns and 4 squamellae; s half of nc TX                  Viguiera
                                                                                                                   a

Key 2. Ray and disk flowers both present; ray flowers yellow, sometimes with reddish brown,
rusty-brown or maroon; receptacle naked.
1. Pappus of disk flowers of capillary bristles.
   2. Phyllaries in 1 series, equal in length, with very minute outer bracts sometimes present at the
      base.
      3. Stem leaves deeply toothed or pinnately lobed or compound, the upper not clasping or
         but weakly so; plants annuals or perennials                                                        Packeraa
      3. Stem leaves shallowly toothed to subentire, conspicuously clasping; plants annuals
                                                                                                            Senecio
  2. Phyllaries of unequal lengths; imbricate in 2 or more rows.
     4. Pappus of disk flowers double, the inner of capillary bristles, the outer of shorter (0.3–1.0
        mm) stout bristles or scales.
        5. Receptacle with a chaff of long subulate, persistent scales; phyllaries spiny-tipped, white
           margined; lower and basal leaves often pinnately lobed, sometimes deeply so                    Xanthisma
        5. Receptacle naked; phyllaries not as above; leaves entire to toothed to shallowly lobed.
           6. Lower stem leaves often grass-like in appearance, with “parallel” veins; basal leaves
              usually much longer than stem leaves; stems and leaves with long, silvery white, silky
              pubescence; in nc TX known only from Tarrant Co., mainly se and e TX                         Pityopsis
           6. Lower stem leaves not as above; basal leaves various; stem and leaf pubescence
              various; widespread in nc TX.
              7. Upper and middle stem leaves little or not narrowed at base, slightly to strongly
                 clasping; annual or perennial from taproot.
                 8. Upper leaves clasping, ovate; leaf blades scabrous above, hispid-pilose beneath;
                    achenes of ray flowers without a pappus                                              Heterotheca
                                                                                                                   a
                 8. Upper leaves slightly clasping, oblanceolate; leaf blades hairy to nearly smooth
292   ASTERACEAE

                   on both sides; achenes of ray flowers with a pappus of bristles and sometimes
                   small scales                                                                              Chrysopsis
              7. Upper and middle stem leaves tapered to slender petiole-like bases; perennial from
                 woody crown                                                                                Heterothecaa
     4. Pappus of all flowers a single row (but sometimes some can be unequal in length).
        9. Disk flowers with pappus bristles 1 or 2; leaves linear, entire                                   Chrysopsis
        9. Disk flowers with pappus bristles several to numerous; leaves various.
           10. Leaves pinnatifid or bipinnatifid                                                        Machaeranthera a
           10. Leaves simple, nearly entire to prominently toothed.
               11. Heads (excluding ligules of ray flowers) 2 cm or more broad; leaves spiny-toothed
                                                                                                              Grindelia
               11. Heads (excluding ligules of ray flowers) < 2 cm broad; leaves spiny-toothed OR in
                   most species not spiny-toothed.
                   12. Heads relatively large, hemispheric or broadly conic, wider than tall; stems
                        glandular-pubescent, from a taproot.
                        13. Upper leaves conspicuously toothed; phyllaries without scarious margins
                                                                                                           Rayjacksonia
                        13. Upper leaves entire or nearly so (but can be bristly-ciliate); phyllaries with
                            a darker line in the middle and scarious margins                                  Croptilon
                   12. Heads small, cylindrical, taller than wide; stems without glandular hairs, from a
                        fibrous root system.
                        14. Plants with glandular-punctate dots, these especially obvious on the leaves;
                            inflorescences corymbiform (= flat-topped)                                        Euthamia
                        14. Plants without glandular-punctate dots (except in 1 species with a panicle);
                            inflorescences paniculate, or axillary, or if corymbiform then not gland-
                            dotted                                                                             Solidago
1. Pappus of disk flowers of awns, scales, scaly bristles, a crown, or absent or nearly so.
   15. Phyllaries and generally also the leaves conspicuously gland-dotted.
       16. Leaves linear, 1–2 mm wide, glandular-punctate marginally; pappus of 0–4 short scales
           forming a low crown 0.5–1(–2) mm long; phyllaries in 1 series                                          Pectis
       16. Leaves linear, 2–6 mm wide, with coarse teeth marginally OR leaves pinnately divided
           into 5–15 linear lobes; pappus of 10–12 awned or awnless scales, often longer than 2
           mm; phyllaries in 2 series.
           17. Leaves with coarse teeth, but not pinnately divided into linear lobes                        Dysodiopsis
           17. Leaves pinnately divided into 5–15 linear lobes                                             Thymophylla
   15. Phyllaries and leaves without conspicuous glandular dots (but may be minutely punctate-
       dotted).
       18. Phyllaries reflexed at anthesis or curled back; stems winged OR not so.
           19. Leaf blades decurrent; stems winged                                                            Helenium
           19. Leaf blades not decurrent on stem; stems not winged.
               20. Leaves toothed, broader than linear, much > 2 mm wide; phyllaries curled back
                   even in bud, gummy                                                                         Grindelia
               20. Leaves or leaf segments linear to thread-like, usually < 2 mm wide, entire;
                   phyllaries reflexed at anthesis, not gummy                                                 Helenium
       18. Phyllaries erect at anthesis; stems not winged.
           21. Stem leaves present, oblanceolate to ovate, much broader than filiform to linear.
               22. Leaves sessile, entire; stems and leaf margins with long, wide-spreading, cottony
                   hairs; growing on sandy or rocky open ground                                             Amblyolepis
               22. Leaves petiolate, with large serrations/small lobes; stems and leaf margins gla-
                                                                                                     ASTERACEAE    293

                  brous or with minute pubescence; growing in crevices on limestone bluffs
                                                                                                               Perityle
          21. Stem leaves or their segments filiform to linear OR stem leaves absent.
              23. Leaves simple and entire, essentially all cauline; phyllaries resinous shiny, glabrous,
                  in several series                                                                         Gutierrezia
              23. Leaves simple and entire OR with 1–5 short lobes OR with 3–15 long, linear-
                  filiform divisions, at least some of the leaves frequently forming basal rosettes;
                  phyllaries dull, typically pubescent, usually in 1 series.
                  24. Leaves pinnatifid with 3–15 long, linear-filiform divisions; outer phyllaries
                        united near their noticeably thickened bases                                        Hymenoxyss
                  24. Leaves simple, entire, or with 1–5 short lobes; phyllaries all separate, not
                        thickened                                                                           Tetraneuris

Key 3. Ray and disk flowers both present; ray flowers white, pink, lavender, blue, or reddish
purple; pappus of capillary bristles.
1. Ray flowers inconspicuous, barely exceeding the phyllaries                                                   Conyza
1. Ray flowers conspicuous, twice or more length of phyllaries.
   2. Leaves basal; heads solitary at end of a scape; corollas of disk flowers bilaterally symmetrical,
      cream-colored, maturing to crimson                                                                     Chaptalia
   2. Leaves cauline; heads numerous at ends of branches; corollas of disk flowers radially sym-
      metrical, yellow, or sometimes becoming pink with age.
      3. Ray flowers more than 50, with corollas less than 1 mm wide; pappus of ray flowers sparse
         or absent                                                                                            Erigeron
      3. Ray flowers less than 50, with corollas more than 1 mm wide; pappus of ray flowers of
         capillary bristles.
         4. Capillary bristles barbellate; plants scapose; flowers solitary                                Townsendia
         4. Capillary bristles smooth; plants caulescent; flowers various.
            5. Leaves, particularly those in upper half of plant, scale-like; plants less than 15(–20) cm
               tall                                                                                       Chaetopappa
            5. Leaves larger, not scale-like, even the upper reduced leaves not scale-like OR if leaves
               reduced and the plant almost leafless (in Chloracantha), then plants much greater
               than 20 cm tall; plants more than 20 cm tall.
               6. Plants almost leafless, rush-like, the leaves if present usually minute; thorns often
                  present in upper leaf axils; stems green and glaucous, photosynthetic, alive for up
                  to ca. 4 growing seasons                                                                Chloracantha
               6. Plants with leaves small to well-developed; thorns absent; stems not as above                   Aster

Key 4. Ray and disk flowers both present; ray flowers white, pink, lavender, or reddish purple;
pappus of awns, scales, scaly bristles, a minute crown, or absent.
1. Receptacle chaffy, the bracts associated with each flower.
   2. Only ray flowers maturing achenes, these much larger than those of the sterile disk flowers.
      3. Corollas of ray flowers white or yellow, the ligules 7–20(–30) mm long; ray achenes thick,
         rounded or weakly compressed; leaves opposite or alternate.
         4. Corollas of ray flowers white; leaf blades entire to pinnately lobed; phyllaries in several
            series; the inner completely clasping the achenes                                           Melampodium
         4. Corollas of ray flowers yellow; leaf blades usually ± palmately 3–5-lobed; phyllaries in
            1–2 series, subtending, not clasping the achenes                                             Smallanthus
      3. Corollas of ray flowers white, the ligules minute, < 1 mm long; ray achenes strongly flat-
         tened, without wings, persistent on mature achenes; leaves alternate                             Parthenium
   2. Ray and disk flowers both maturing achenes.
294    ASTERACEAE

      5. Ray flowers with inconspicuous corollas 3 mm or less long; leaves opposite                            Eclipta
      5. Ray flowers with corollas 5 mm or more long, often much longer, these usually very con-
         spicuous; leaves alternate.
         6. Stems not winged; receptacle chaff stiff, sharp, longer than disk flowers; leaves mostly
            basal, the stem leaves much reduced upward; heads borne on long, naked, unbranched
            peduncles                                                                                       Echinacea
         6. Stems winged; receptacle chaff soft, hidden by disk flowers; leaves mostly cauline; little
            reduced upward; heads on short leafy peduncles                                                  Verbesina
1. Receptacle naked.
   7. Pappus a short crown or none.
      8. Ray flowers with ligules ca. 2 mm or less long; disk flowers white to pinkish                        Achillea
      8. Ray flowers with ligules much longer than 2 mm; disk flowers various colors.
         9. Leaves bipinnately dissected                                                                     Anthemis
         9. Leaves entire or toothed or lobed.
            10. Leaves toothed to lobed; plants rhizomatous perennials 20–100 cm tall; disk 1–2.5+
                 cm wide; ligules 10–nearly 30 mm long, white                                          Leucanthemum
            10. Leaves entire; plants taprooted annuals 10–40 cm tall; disk 0.6–1 cm wide; ligules 5–
                 12 mm long, white to bluish- or pinkish-tinged                                           Astranthium
   7. Pappus of awns, scales, hairs, short bristles, or a cup-like crown.
      11. Pappus of 5 scales alternating with 5 slender awns; plants low; dainty; plants taprooted
          annuals, 5–15(–25) cm tall; ray corollas white to pinkish                                      Chaetopappa
      11. Pappus not 5 scales and 5 awns, various; plants various heights; plants annuals or perenni-
          als; ray corollas various colors.
          12. Disk flowers violet                                                                            Palafoxia
          12. Disk flowers yellow.
                13. Achenes 4-angled to round, not winged; leaves varying from entire to deeply pin-
                    natifid, but at least some usually toothed to pinnatifid, sometimes linear, but usu-
                    ally broader; phyllaries > 0.5 mm wide; annuals or perennials                     Aphanostephus
                13. Achenes with winged margins (2 or 3 wings); leaves entire, mostly linear (lower
                    leaves sometimes linear-lanceolate); phyllaries < 0.5 mm wide; perennials                 Boltonia

Key 5. Disk flowers only; phyllaries with hooked or straight spines, or tubercles, sometimes
united into a bur, OR with large teeth at edges; plants frequently spiny.
1. All flowers imperfect; pistillate and staminate flowers in different heads (plants monoecious);
   pistillate flowers apetalous or corolla reduced to a ring; staminate flowers with anthers not joined
   at the edges; pappus none.
   2. Staminate heads in racemes or spikes; bur ca. 5 mm or less long, with straight or hooked spine-
      like structures OR tubercles, 1-flowered; lower leaves usually opposite                                  Ambrosia
   2. Staminate heads in terminal clusters; bur (cocklebur) 10–30 mm long, with hooked spine-
      like structures, 2-flowered; lower leaves alternate                                                     Xanthium
1. All flowers perfect; corollas large, showy, with lobes at least 1/3 or more of corolla length, vari-
   ously colored; anthers joined at the edges; pappus of capillary or plumose bristles (THISTLES).
   3. Leaves without spines; phyllaries without spines at tip OR spiny-tipped; corollas of outer row
      of flowers often enlarged, simulating ray flowers                                                       Centaurea
   3. Leaves with spines (can be entire in 1 species of Carthamus); phyllaries spiny-tipped; corollas
      of all flowers similar.
      4. Corollas yellow to orange (rarely whitish); pappus absent or of ± rigid, flat, bristle-like scales
         to ca. 1 cm long                                                                                     Carthamus
      4. Corollas white to pink, lavender, or purple; pappus of plumose or barbellate, hair-like bristles,
         these of variable length but often much > 1 cm long.
                                                                                                   ASTERACEAE       295

       5. Pappus bristles plumose (= feather-like, with long side branches) at least basally; phyllar-
          ies all ± appressed, linear; widespread native and introduced species                                Cirsium
       5. Pappus bristles barbellate (with short side branches) or barbless; phyllaries variable (but
          the outer ones sometimes spreading or reflexed, flat, broad, 2–8 mm wide); introduced
          species with rather limited distributions in nc TX.
          6. Stems conspicuously prickly winged (by decurrent leaf bases); leaves usually uniformly
             colored above; filaments separate.
             7. Phyllaries 2–9 mm wide (at least near base); leaves ± glabrous or with cottony pu-
                bescence below; heads 10–70 mm in diam.; receptacle with numerous bristles ca.
                2 mm long; pappus 11–20 mm long                                                               Carduus
             7. Phyllaries < 2 mm wide; leaves with cottony pubescence below; heads 25–50 mm
                in diam.; receptacle bristles absent or very short; pappus 7–9 mm long                    Onopordum
          6. Stems not winged; leaves ± mottled green and white above; filaments united into a
             tube above their attachment to the corolla, free below anthers                                    Silybum

Key 6. Disk flowers only; phyllaries mostly entire; flowers pink, blue, purple, green, white, or
yellowish cream.
1. Shrubs.
   2. Pappus of capillary bristles; leaf blades entire to toothed, never lobed or dissected.
      3. Flowers imperfect, the plans dioecious (male and female plants can have quite different
         appearances); leaves linear to lanceolate, elliptic, rhomboid, or obovate, sessile; plants very
         variable in size, from 0.25 m to 6 m tall (but if < 1 m tall, then leaves ± linear)                   Baccharis
      3. Flowers perfect; leaves ovate to lanceolate, with petioles to 10 mm long; plants to 1.2 m tall        Brickellia
   2. Pappus absent; leaf blades entire to more often lobed or dissected                                       Artemisia
1. Herbs.
   4. Plants white-woolly, at least on lower leaf surfaces; basal leaves or inflorescence leaves largest;
      stem leaves smaller or greatly reduced except in one species of Gnaphalium.
      5. Plants typically small, usually < 10(–15) cm tall; heads ± completely imbedded in woolly
         hairs; pappus lacking; disk corollas (central) 4-toothed; receptacle chaffy                                Evax
      5. Plants over 10 cm tall; heads often with woolly hairs, but not completely embedded in the
         hairs; pappus of hair-like bristles present; disk corollas 3- or 5-toothed; receptacle ± naked.
         6. Pappus of plumose bristles (use lens to see side branches) 10–11 mm long; leaves 1.5–
            4 mm wide; apparently rare in nc TX                                                                   Facelis
         6. Pappus of smooth or barbellate bristles, the bristles much < 10 mm long except in
            Antennaria which has basal leaves 15–50 mm wide; leaves of various widths, often much
            wider than 4 mm; widespread in nc TX.
            7. Basal and stem leaves present, the stem leaves smaller in most species; basal leaves 22
               mm or less wide (usually much less); phyllaries ± completely scarious (except midrib
               can be greenish); heads all alike, bisexual, usually numerous in elongate or terminal
               inflorescences, the individual heads usually ± sessile in glomerules.
               8. Pappus bristles not united basally, separating individually or in clusters; inflorescences
                  often spreading, somewhat flat-topped, sometimes elongate; phyllaries ± obtuse to
                  acutish; flowering (Jul–)Sep–Nov                                                     Pseudognaphalium
               8. Pappus bristles united basally, deciduous as a ring of hairs; inflorescences usually ±
                  elongate, spike-like; phyllaries acute to acuminate; flowering Mar–Jun                     Gamochaeta
            7. Leaves nearly all basal, the stem leaves very reduced; basal leaves 15–50 mm wide;
               phyllaries herbaceous at least in lower half; heads of 2 kinds, the sexes on different
               plants, typically few at end of stem, the individual heads short pedunculate or solitary
                                                                                                              Antennaria
   4. Plants not white-woolly; pubescence various or plants glabrous; leaves various, but in many
      species stem leaves well-developed and prominent.
296    ASTERACEAE

      9. Pappus of scales or awns, or absent.
         10. Pappus absent; heads small, white or greenish, 8 mm or less wide.
             11. Plants very small, ca. 15 cm or less tall; achenes flattened, with wings or ± wing-like
                 lateral appendages, tipped by the persistent spine-like style (painful in a manner
                 similar to sandburs)                                                                            Soliva
                                                                                                                      a
             11. Plants 20–200 cm tall; achenes not flattened or not conspicuously so, without
                 either wing-like lateral appendages or spine-like style.
                 12. Leaf blades entire to toothed, neither lobed nor dissected, not gray- or white-
                     woolly; stems and leaves usually resinous-glandular; receptacles chaffy; flowers
                     pistillate or staminate                                                                         Iva
                                                                                                                       a
                 12. Leaf blades (at least some) usually lobed or dissected but varying to entire, if not
                     lobed or dissected then the leaf blades gray- or white-woolly at least on lower
                     surfaces; stems and leaves either gray to white woolly or nearly glabrous, not
                     resinous glandular; receptacles naked; flowers perfect or pistillate or staminate
                                                                                                               Artemisia
         10. Pappus of awns or scales (sometimes < 1 mm long); heads various.
             13. Corollas lavender or pink; leaves usually entire (can be lobed to pinnately dissected
                 in the one species of Hymenopappus that keys here).
                 14. Pappus of 14–18 scales (< 1 mm long); leaves variously lobed or pinnately dis-
                     sected, or rarely entire                                                            Hymenopappus
                 14. Pappus of 5–10 scales; leaves entire.
                     15. Plants with 1–few heads; pappus of 5 scarious translucent scales; recep-
                          tacle chaffy; involucres > 10 mm across                                             Marshallia
                     15. Plants usually with numerous heads; pappus of 7–10 scarious white scales;
                         receptacle naked; involucres ca. 10 mm or less across                                 Palafoxia
             13. Corollas white or greenish; leaves variously lobed or pinnatifid OR entire.
                 16. Leaves entire; heads (including corollas) commonly 25–35 mm wide at flower-
                     ing time                                                                                 Marshallia
                 16. Leaves dentate to lobed or pinnatifid; heads much < 25 mm wide at flowering
                     time.
                     17. All leaves usually pinnatifid; phyllaries petaloid at tips; receptacle naked; ray
                          flowers absent                                                                 Hymenopappus
                     17. Upper leaves merely dentate to lobed; phyllaries not petaloid at tips; recep-
                          tacle chaffy; usually with 5 very short, often overlooked ray flowers              Parthenium
      9. Pappus of bristles.
         18. Leaves opposite or rarely whorled.
             19. Vines; phyllaries 4 per head; flowers usually 4 per head                                       Mikania
             19. Not vines; phyllaries more than 4 per head; flowers more than 4 per head
                                                                                                             Eupatorium
         18. Leaves alternate.
             20. Corollas and sometimes phyllaries pink or lavender to purple.
                 21. Pappus a double row of bristles, the inner row of long bristles, the outer of very
                     short bristles                                                                            Vernonia
                 21. Pappus a single row of bristles.
                     22. Several heads clustered and subtended by a whorl of ca. 3 ovate leaf-like
                          bracts ca. 1 cm long; pappus of 5 bristles                                       Elephantopus
                     22. Heads not in clusters subtended by leafy bracts; pappus of numerous
                         capillary bristles.
                          23. Inflorescence an unbranched spike or raceme; leaves essentially linear,
                              entire, punctate; plants without camphor odor                                       Liatris
                                                                                                  ASTERACEAE     297

                       23. Inflorescence much branched; leaves ovate to elliptic, serrate to ser-
                           rate-dentate or crenate, more or less glandular pubescent; plants aro-
                           matic with distinctive camphor-like odor                                         Pluchea
           20. Corollas white or cream.
               24. Leaves pinnately dissected into linear segments less than 2 mm wide
                                                                                                         Eupatorium
               24. Leaves not pinnately dissected.
                   25. Heads with 5 equal phyllaries and 5 flowers; leaves mostly basal, broadly
                       ovate, up to 15+ cm long, 2–8 cm wide, entire or rarely toothed, with promi-
                       nent, ± parallel, longitudinal nerves (often 7–9) eventually converging to-
                       ward the tip                                                                    Arnoglossum
                   25. Heads with numerous phyllaries and more than 5 flowers; leaves basal or
                       cauline, variously shaped, entire or often distinctly toothed, usually smaller,
                       with venation not as above.
                       26. Leaves mostly basal; several heads clustered and subtended by a whorl
                           of ca. 3 ovate leaf-like bracts ca. 1 cm long; pappus a single whorl of 5
                           bristles                                                                    Elephantopus
                       26. Leaves mostly cauline; heads not in clusters subtended by bracts;
                           pappus not as above.
                           27. Plants perennial from a woody base or woody taproot; pappus plu-
                               mose OR not so; heads with all flowers perfect                               Brickellia
                           27. Plants annual; pappus never plumose; heads with pistillate and
                               perfect flowers.
                               28. Leaves sharply and conspicuously toothed and sometimes ir-
                                    regularly lobed; inflorescences corymbiform cymes of few to
                                    many heads; phyllaries in a single series, 9–17 mm long (some-
                                    times with a few minute bracteoles at base); ray flowers not
                                    present                                                                Erechtites
                               28. Leaves entire or subentire; inflorescences panicles of numerous
                                    small heads; phyllaries imbricate, 3–5 mm long; small incon-
                                    spicuous ray flowers usually present                                      Conyza

Key 7. Disk flowers only or apparently so; phyllaries entire or minutely serrated; flowers yel-
low to reddish brown, rusty-brown, or maroon.
1. Pappus of capillary bristles or stramineous stiff bristles.
   2. Leaves opposite                                                                                         Eclipta
   2. Leaves alternate.
      3. Phyllaries in a single series (subtended by a few tiny bractlets); middle and upper leaves
         undulate to pinnately lobed, auriculate, ± clasping                                                Senecio
      3. Phyllaries in several series, imbricate; middle and upper leaves entire or toothed, neither
         auriculate nor clasping.
         4. Flowers 4–6 per head; all flowers perfect and tubular, without ligule; phyllaries resinous
                                                                                                          Bigelowia
         4. Flowers ca. 20 or more per head; marginal flowers pistillate, with inconspicuous ligule
            scarcely if at all surpassing the disk; phyllaries not resinous                                  Conyza
1. Pappus of scales or awns or short crown or absent.
   5. Receptacle chaffy or with bristly setae.
      6. Pappus of 2 retrorsely or antrorsely barbed awns; leaves opposite.
         7. Leaves decurrent on stems forming wings                                                       Verbesina
         7. Leaves not decurrent, not forming wings on stem.
298   ASTERACEAE

          8. Phyllaries joined at base 1/4 to 1/2 length; corollas yellowish with reddish brown veins
                                                                                                        Thelesperma
           8. Phyllaries all separate; corollas all yellow                                                    Bidens
     6. Pappus of scales or smooth, nonbarbed awns; leaves basal or alternate.
        9. Corollas reddish purple or brownish red; heads solitary at end of each peduncle; leaves
            entire to deeply lobed                                                                         Gaillardia
        9. Corollas yellowish; heads solitary at end of each peduncle OR heads numerous in corym-
           bose inflorescences; leaves various, entire to tripinnatifid.
           10. Heads solitary at end of each peduncle; ray flowers absent; lower and middle leaves
               entire to toothed or pinnatitifid                                                           Gaillardia
           10. Heads numerous in corymbose inflorescences; ray flowers usually present with very
               small corollas; lower and middle leaves bipinnatifid to tripinnatifid                     Parthenium
  5. Receptacle naked.
     11. Phyllaries and leaves with large (up to 1 mm) yellowish brown or orange oil glands             Dysodiopsis
     11. Phyllaries and leaves without conspicuous oil glands (but may be minutely punctate-
         dotted or have glandular hairs).
         12. Stems winged; phyllaries reflexed at anthesis, not gummy                                      Helenium
         12. Stems not winged; phyllaries curled back even in bud, gummy                                   Grindelia


                           TECHNICAL KEY TO THE TRIBES
1. All flowers ligulate, perfect, the ligule strap-shaped; plant sap usually milky               Lactuceae (Cichorieae)
1. Disk flowers with tubular eligulate corollas present; ray flowers with strap-shaped ligules present
   or absent, if present, pistillate or neutral; plant sap usually watery.
   2. Ray flowers present (these can rarely lack corollas), these pistillate or neutral.
      3. Receptacle chaffy, a bract subtending each flower; lower leaves in most genera opposite;
         ligules tending to be rather broad, often larger than typical for other tribes                     Heliantheae
      3. Receptacle naked or rarely with bristles that are not associated with individual flowers; leaves
         variable; ligules variable.
         4. Phyllaries dry, membranous at margins and tips, usually whitish; ray corollas white or ab-
            sent; pappus absent or a mere border or crown; leaves generally ± dissected; plants often
            with a characteristic odor                                                                     Anthemideae
         4. Phyllaries herbaceous; with or without membranous margins; ray corollas usually yellow,
            occasionally pink, lavender, or white; pappus various or absent; leaves generally entire or
            toothed; plants usually without a characteristic odor.
            5. Phyllaries imbricate (= overlapping) in 2–many series                                           Astereae
            5. Phyllaries not overlapping (the margins of one phyllary can, however, abut the next), in
               1–2 series, the second series often minute at base of first.
               6. Pappus of capillary bristles; leaves without punctate dots or glandular dots              Senecioneae
               6. Pappus of chaffy scales, a mere border or crown, or absent or nearly so; leaves fre-
                  quently glandular or with punctate dots                                                     Helenieae
   2. Ray flowers absent (but ray-like marginal flowers sometimes present in Cardueae and
      Mutisieae).
      7. Corollas of central flowers bilaterally symmetrical; leaves in a basal rosette only; a single
         genus rare in nc TX                                                                                  Mutisieae
      7. Corollas of central flowers radially symmetrical; leaves basal or cauline; numerous wide-
         spread genera in nc TX.
         8. Corolla tubes elongate, the lobes at least 1/4 or usually more of the total corolla length;
            receptacle densely bristly, the bristles not associated with individual flowers; anthers long-
            tailed at base; phyllaries spiny or their margins with large teeth; leaves usually spiny;
            (THISTLES)                                                                             Cardueae (Cynareae)
                                                                                   ANTHEMIDEAE/ASTERACEAE          299

       8. Corolla tubes not elongate, the lobes small teeth less than 1/4 the total corolla length;
          receptacle naked or with chaff associated with each individual flower, or rarely bristly;
          anthers tail-less or short-tailed (in Inuleae); phyllaries entire or with fine teeth, not spine-
          tipped; leaves not spiny.
          9. Plants white-woolly pubescent at least on the lower leaf surfaces; phyllaries whitish,
             with scarious margins; anthers short-tailed                                                         Inuleae
          9. Plants glabrous or pubescent, not white-woolly; phyllaries various; with or without
             scarious margins; anthers tail-less or short-tailed (in Inuleae).
             10. Phyllaries of pistillate heads joined and either with hooked or straight spine-like
                 structures or with tubercules, the heads thus bur-like; all flowers imperfect, pistil-
                 late and staminate flowers in same or different heads; stamens usually not united
                 by anthers (COCKLEBURS, RAGWEEDS )                                                         Heliantheae
             10. Phyllaries without either spine-like structures or tubercules, the heads not bur-like;
                 flowers perfect or imperfect; anthers united into a ring around style.
                 11. Pappus of scales or awns or none.
                      12. Receptacle chaffy, bracts associated with each flower; phyllaries variable
                          but tending to be in several series                                               Heliantheae
                      12. Receptacle naked or rarely with bristles; phyllaries appearing to be in one
                          series                                                                               Heleniae
                 11. Pappus of capillary bristles.
                      13. Phyllaries scarious margined or papery, often white or pink or lavender.
                          14. Phyllaries imbricate (= overlapping like shingles) in 2–many series;
                               anthers short-tailed at base                                                      Inuleae
                          14. Phyllaries not overlapping (the margins of one phyllary abutting the
                               next), in 1–2 series, the second series often minute at base of first;
                               anthers not tailed at base                                                  Senecioneae
                      13. Phyllaries herbaceous, sometimes pigmented.
                          15. Either phyllaries and corollas usually purplish and heads in a corym-
                               bose arrangement OR small clusters of several heads subtended by 3
                               foliaceous ovate bracts; style branches slender to filiform; leaves
                               alternate                                                                     Vernonieae
                          15. Phyllaries not purplish (or if so, heads in a spike-like or raceme-like
                               arrangement; clusters of heads not subtended by 3 foliaceous bracts;
                               style branches either slender but wider apically (= ± clavate) OR broad
                               and flattened; leaves alternate OR opposite.
                               16. Corollas variously colored, but not distinctly yellow; style branches
                                   slender, wider apically                                                 Eupatorieae
                               16. Corollas often yellow, but varying to other colors; style branches
                                   usually broad and flattened                                                 Astereae


                                         ANTHEMIDEAE TRIBE
1. Pappus of short but discrete scales; phyllaries nearly equal, not imbricate, petaloid at the tips
   (Hymenopappus can be reached here and in Helenieae key)                                           Hymenopappus
1. Pappus a short crown or absent; phyllaries various, not petaloid.
   2. Heads with disk flowers only (or apparently so—corolla-less ray flowers present in Solvia).
      3. Plants very small, 15 cm or less tall; achenes flattened, tipped by the persistent spine-like
         style (painful in a manner similar to sandburs), with wings or ± wing-like lateral append-
         ages                                                                                               Solivaa
      3. Plants 20–150 cm tall; achenes not noticeably flattened, without either spine-like style or
         wing-like lateral appendages                                                                    Artemisia
300   ASTERACEAE/ASTEREAE

  2. Heads with both evident ray flowers and disk flowers, the ray flowers with evident ligules.
     4. Ray corollas with ligules ca. 2 mm long or less                                                        Achillea
     4. Ray corollas with ligules 7 mm long or longer.
        5. Leaves toothed or lobed, but not finely dissected; ray flowers 15–35 per head; ray corollas
           with ligules 10–nearly 30 mm long; heads usually solitary at ends of main stems and long
           branches; plants rhizomatous perennials                                                      Leucanthemum
        5. Leaves finely bipinnately dissected; ray flowers ca. 10–14 per head; ray corollas with ligules
           7–10(–12) mm long mm long; heads usually several per main stem; plants taprooted
           annuals                                                                                           Anthemis


                                             ASTEREAE TRIBE
1. Heads with only disk flowers.
   2. Plants shrubs, very variable in size, from 0.25–6 m tall; flowers imperfect, the plants dioecious
      (male and female plants can have quite different appearances)                                         Baccharis
   2. Plants herbaceous, 0.1–ca. 2 m tall; at least some flowers perfect, the plants not dioecious.
      3. Phyllaries resinous; corollas yellow.
         4. Flowers numerous per head; leaves serrate to spiny toothed, oblong to lanceolate or
            deltoid, over 5 mm wide                                                                         Grindelia
         4. Flowers 4–6 per head; leaves entire, linear, ca. 2 mm wide                                      Bigelowia
      3. Phyllaries not resinous; corollas white.
         5. Leaves opposite                                                                                   Eclipta
         5. Leaves alternate                                                                                  Conyza
1. Heads with ray and disk flowers, the ray flowers usually conspicuous but rarely concealed by
   phyllaries.
   6. Ray flowers yellow.
      7. Pappus of scales or awns or a few stout bristles or none.
         8. Leaves linear, entire; pappus of scales or none; disks less than 0.5 cm wide                  Gutierrezia
         8. Leaves linear-lanceolate or wider, serrate to spiny-toothed; pappus of awns or a few stout
            bristles; disks 0.7–3 cm wide                                                                   Grindelia
      7. Pappus with numerous capillary bristles, with or without an additional row of scales or short
         bristles.
         9. Pappus of disk flowers double, the inner of capillary bristles, the outer of shorter stout
            bristles or scales.
            10. Receptacle with a chaff of long subulate, persistent scales; phyllaries spiny-tipped,
                white-margined; lower and basal leaves often pinnately lobed, sometimes deeply so
                                                                                                           Xanthisma
          10. Receptacle naked; phyllaries not as above; leaves entire to toothed to shallowly lobed.
              11. Lower stem leaves often grass-like in appearance, with “parallel” veins; basal leaves
                  usually much longer than stem leaves; stems and leaves with long, silvery white,
                  silky pubescence; in nc TX known only from Tarrant Co., mainly se and e TX                Pityopsis
              11. Lower stem leaves not as above; basal leaves various; stem and leaf pubescence
                  various; widespread in nc TX.
                   12. Upper and middle stem leaves little or not narrowed at base, slightly to
                       strongly clasping; plants annuals or perennials from taproot.
                       13. Upper leaves clasping, ovate; leaf blades scabrous above, hispid-pilose
                             beneath; achenes of ray flowers without a pappus                             Heterotheca
                                                                                                                    a
                       13. Upper leaves slightly clasping, oblanceolate; leaf blades hairy to sparsely
                                                                                     ASTEREAE/ASTERACEAE        301

                 12. Upper and middle stem leaves tapered to slender petiole-like bases; plants
                      perennials from woody crown                                                        Heterothecaa
     9. Pappus of all flowers a single row of capillary bristles.
        14. Disk flowers with pappus bristles 1 or 2; leaves linear, entire                                Chrysopsis
        14. Disk flowers with pappus bristles several to numerous; leaves various.
            15. Leaves pinnatifid or bipinnatifid                                                   Machaeranthera  a
            15. Leaves simple, nearly entire to prominently toothed.
                16. Heads (excluding ligules of ray flowers) 2 cm or more broad; leaves spiny
                    toothed                                                                                 Grindelia
                16. Heads (excluding ligules of ray flowers) < 2 cm broad; leaves spiny-toothed
                    OR in most species not spiny-toothed.
                    17. Heads relatively large, hemispheric or broadly conic, wider than tall; stems
                        and phyllaries glandular pubescent; taprooted annuals OR perennials.
                        18. Upper leaves conspicuously toothed; phyllaries without scarious
                            margins                                                                     Rayjacksonia
                        18. Upper leaves entire or nearly so (but can be bristly-ciliate); phyllaries
                            with a darker line in the middle and scarious margins                           Croptilon
                    17. Heads small, cylindrical, taller than wide; stems without glandular hairs;
                        perennials from a fibrous root system.
                        19. Inflorescences corymbiform (= flat-topped).
                            20. Leaves with glandular-punctate dots                                         Euthamia
                            20. Leaves without glandular-punctate dots                                       Solidago
                        19. Inflorescences panicles, or axillary                                             Solidago
6. Ray flowers white, or pink, or lavender, or purple.
   21. Pappus absent or nearly so (minute ring of tissue can be present)                                 Astranthium
   21. Pappus present of capillary bristles, awns, scales, hairs, or a cup-like crown.
       22. Pappus of disk flowers of awns, scales, hairs, or a cup-like crown.
           23. Pappus of 5 scales alternating with 5 slender awns; plants low, dainty, taprooted
                annuals 5–15(–25) cm tall; ray corollas white to pinkish                                Chaetopappa
           23. Pappus not of 5 scales and 5 awns, various; plants annuals or perennials of various
                heights, often much larger than 25 cm tall; ray corollas various colors.
                24. Achenes 4-angled to round, not winged; leaves varying from entire to deeply
                    pinnatifid, but at least some usually toothed to pinnatifid, sometimes linear,
                    but usually broader; phyllaries > 0.5 mm wide; annuals or perennials             Aphanostephus
                24. Achenes with winged margins (2 or 3 wings); leaves entire, mostly linear (lower
                    leaves sometimes linear-lanceolate); phyllaries < 0.5 mm wide; perennials
                                                                                                             Boltonia
       22. Pappus of disk flowers of numerous capillary bristles.
           25. Ray flowers inconspicuous, barely exceeding the phyllaries                                     Conyza
           25. Ray flowers conspicuous, twice or more length of phyllaries.
                26. Ray flowers more than 50, with corollas less than 1 mm wide; pappus of ray
                    flowers sparse or absent                                                                 Erigeron
                26. Ray flowers less than 50, with corollas 1 mm wide or wider; pappus of ray
                    flowers of capillary bristles.
                    27. Capillary bristles barbellate; plants scapose; flowers solitary                   Townsendia
                    27. Capillary bristles smooth; plants caulescent; flowers various.
                        28. Leaves, particularly those in upper half of plant, scale-like; plants less
                             than 15(–20) cm tall                                                       Chaetopappa
                        28. Leaves larger, not scale-like, even the upper reduced leaves not scale-
                             like OR if leaves reduced and the plant almost leafless (in Chloracantha),
302    ASTERACEAE/CARDUEAE

                               then plants much greater than 20 cm tall; plants more than 20 cm
                               tall.
                               29. Plants almost leafless, rush-like, the leaves if present usually minute;
                                     thorns often present in upper leaf axils; stems green and glau-
                                     cous, photosynthetic, alive for up to ca. 4 growing seasons            Chloracantha
                               29. Plants with leaves small to well-developed; thorns absent; stems
                                     not as above                                                                  Aster


                                   CARDUEAE (CYNAREAE) TRIBE
1. Leaves without spines; phyllaries without spines at tip OR spiny-tipped; corollas of outer row of
   flowers often enlarged, simulating ray flowers                                                             Centaurea
1. Leaves with spines (can be entire in 1 species of Carthamus); phyllaries spiny-tipped; corollas of
   all flowers similar.
   2. Corollas yellow to orange (rarely whitish); pappus absent OR of ± rigid, flat, bristle-like, ciliate
      scales to 1 cm long as well as some outer short scales                                                  Carthamus
   2. Corollas white to pink, lavender, or purple; pappus of plumose or barbellate, hair-like bristles,
      these of variable length but often much > 1 cm long.
      3. Pappus bristles plumose (= feather-like, with long side branches) at least basally; phyllaries
          all ± appressed, linear; widespread native and introduced species                                     Cirsium
      3. Pappus bristles barbellate (= with short side branches) or barbless; phyllaries variable (but
          the outer ones sometimes spreading or reflexed, flat, broad, 2–8 mm wide); introduced
          species with rather limited distributions in nc TX.
          4. Stems conspicuously prickly winged (by decurrent leaf bases); leaves usually uniformly
             colored above; filaments separate.
             5. Phyllaries 2–9 mm wide (at least near base); leaves ± glabrous or with cottony pubes-
                cence below; heads 10–70 mm in diam.; receptacle with numerous bristles ca. 2 mm
                long; pappus 11–20 mm long                                                                      Carduus
             5. Phyllaries < 2 mm wide; leaves with cottony pubescence below; heads 25–50 mm in
                diam.; receptacle bristles absent or very short; pappus 7–9 mm long                          Onopordum
          4. Stems not winged; leaves ± mottled green and white above; filaments united into a tube
             above their attachment to the corolla, free below anthers                                          Silybum

                                            EUPATORIEAE TRIBE
1. Perennial twining vine; leaves opposite; phyllaries 4 per head; flowers usually 4 per head                   Mikania
1. Perennial or annual, not a twining vine; leaves alternate or opposite; phyllaries more than 4 per
   head; flowers 3–numerous per head.
   2. Leaves alternate, not finely dissected; achenes 10-ribbed.
      3. Leaves essentially linear, entire, sessile; corollas purple (rarely white); inflorescence an un-
         branched spike or raceme                                                                                 Liatris
      3. Leaves lanceolate to ovate, usually toothed (rarely entire), with petioles to 1 cm long; corol-
         las cream to yellowish cream; inflorescence usually branched, ± hemispherical to flat-topped
         or paniculate or racemose                                                                             Brickellia
   2. Leaves either opposite and not finely dissected OR alternate and finely dissected; achenes 5-
      ribbed                                                                                                 Eupatorium

                                              HELENIEAE TRIBE
1. Phyllaries and generally also the leaves conspicuously gland-dotted.
   2. Leaves linear, 1–2 mm wide, glandular-punctate marginally; pappus of 0–4 short scales form-
      ing a low crown 0.5–1(–2) mm long; phyllaries in 1 series                                                   Pectis
                                                                                      HELIANTHEAE/ASTERACEAE         303

   2. Leaves linear, 2–6 mm wide, with coarse teeth marginally OR leaves pinnately divided into 5–
      15 linear lobes; pappus of 10–12 awned or awnless scales, often longer than 2 mm; phyllaries
      in 2 series.
      3. Leaves with coarse teeth, but not pinnately divided into linear lobes                                Dysodiopsis
      3. Leaves pinnately divided into 5–15 linear lobes                                                     Thymophylla
1. Phyllaries and leaves without conspicuous glandular dots (but may be minutely punctate-dotted).
   4. Receptacle bristly with spine-like setae usually exceeding the achenes                                    Gaillardia
   4. Receptacle usually naked, rarely with poorly developed bristles.
      5. Flowers white or pink or lavender.
         6. Leaves pinnatifid, with conspicuous lobes; flowers usually white (reddish-tinged in 1
            species)                                                                                       Hymenopappus
         6. Leaves entire; flowers pink or lavender.                                                            Palafoxia
      5. Flowers yellow, dark red-maroon, rusty-brown, maroon, or a combination of these colors.
         7. Leaf blades decurrent on stem, forming wings                                                        Helenium
         7. Leaf blades not decurrent on stem, the stems thus not winged.
            8. Leaves or their segments filiform to linear (all very narrow).
               9. Heads (excluding ray flowers) globose; phyllaries and ray flowers reflexed                    Helenium
               9. Heads (excluding ray flowers) hemispherical to cylindrical; phyllaries and ray flowers
                  spreading to erect.
                  10. Leaves pinnatifid with 3–15 long, linear-filiform divisions; outer phyllaries united
                      near their noticeably thickened bases                                                   Hymenoxyss
                  10. Leaves simple, entire, or with 1–5 short lobes; phyllaries all separate, not thickened
                                                                                                              Tetraneuris
            8. Leaves oblanceolate to ovate, much broader than filiform to linear.
               11. Leaves sessile, entire; stems and leaf margins with long, wide-spreading, cottony
                   hairs; growing on sandy or rocky open ground                                              Amblyolepis
               11. Leaves petiolate, with large serrations/small lobes; stems and leaf margins glabrous
                   or with minute pubescence; growing in crevices on limestone bluffs                             Perityle

                                           HELIANTHEAE TRIBE
1. Plants generally wind-pollinated or self-pollinated, the heads small and not at all showy nor
   attractive to pollinators; all flowers imperfect; pistillate and staminate flowers in same or differ-
   ent heads; ray flowers absent; phyllaries either joined forming a bur-like structure with hooked
   or straight spine-like structures or tubercles OR not joined and not bur-like; pappus none.
   2. Staminate and pistillate flowers in same heads; phyllaries without either spine-like structures
      or tubercules, the heads not bur-like                                                                           Iva
                                                                                                                        a
   2. Staminate and pistillate flowers in separate heads, the staminate usually uppermost;
      phyllaries of pistillate heads joined and either with hooked or straight spine-like structures or
      with tubercules, the heads thus bur-like.
      3. Staminate heads in racemes or spikes; bur ca. 5 mm or less long, with straight or hooked
         spine-like-structures OR tubercles, 1-flowered; lower leaves usually opposite                        Ambrosia
      3. Staminate heads in terminal clusters; bur (cocklebur) 10–30 mm long, with hooked spine-
         like structures, 2-flowered; lower leaves alternate                                                  Xanthium
1. Plants generally adapted for attracting pollinating insects, the heads colorful and otherwise at-
   tractive; some or all flowers perfect; ray flowers usually present, with strap-shaped ligule; phyllar-
   ies separate, not forming a bur-like structure; pappus various.
   4. Only ray flowers fertile (= maturing achenes), these achenes much larger than those of the
      sterile disk flowers.
      5. Ray achenes thick, rounded or weakly compressed, without wings.
304   ASTERACEAE/HELIANTHEAE

       6. Corollas of ray flowers white; leaf blades entire to pinnately lobed; phyllaries in several
          series, the inner completely clasping the achenes                                               Melampodium
       6. Corollas of ray flowers yellow; leaf blades usually ± palmately 3–5-lobed; phyllaries in 1–
          2 series, subtending, not clasping the achenes                                                    Smallanthus
    5. Ray achenes strongly flattened, with or without wings.
       7. Achenes broadly winged.
          8. Ray flowers usually 5, in 1 row; phyllaries 8–10 in 2 rows, the outer row distinctly nar-
             rower; disks less than 1.5 cm wide; plants taprooted annuals up to 0.3(–0.65) m tall          Lindheimeraa
          8. Ray flowers numerous, in 2–3 rows; phyllaries numerous, in several rows, ± similar ex-
             cept for size; disks (1.5–)2–3 cm wide; plants coarse perennials up to 2(–3) m tall                Silphium
       7. Achenes not winged.
          9. Ray flowers with corollas white, ca. 1 mm long, persistent on mature achenes                    Parthenium
          9. Ray flowers with corollas yellow, 10 mm or longer, deciduous from mature achenes.
             10. Ray flowers with back of corolla having green, red, or maroon veins; leaves crenate,
                  serrate, dentate, or lyrate-pinnatifid (in one species rare in nc TX), variously pubes-
                  cent but not hispid; pappus none                                                           Berlandieraa
             10. Ray flowers with back of corolla entirely yellow, without colored veins; leaves deeply
                  pinnatifid, densely hispid; pappus of a few scales                                       Engelmannia
 4. Disk flowers fertile; ray flowers present and fertile OR sterile OR absent.
    11. Ray flowers white, pink, or lavender OR if absent, then disk flowers white, pink, or lavender.
        12. Ray flowers absent; disk flowers with corollas elongate, hairy, conspicuously lobed               Marshallia
        12. Ray flowers present; disk flowers not elongate, glabrous or pubescent, the corolla lobes
             only small teeth.
             13. Ray flowers with inconspicuous corollas 3 mm or less long; leaves opposite                       Eclipta
             13. Ray flowers with corollas 5 mm or more long, sometimes much longer, these
                 usually conspicuous; leaves alternate.
                 14. Stems not winged; receptacle chaff stiff, sharp, longer than disk flowers; leaves
                      mostly basal, the stem leaves much reduced upward; heads borne on long,
                      naked, unbranched peduncles; ligules of ray corollas 2–9 cm long                        Echinacea
                 14. Stems winged; receptacle chaff soft, hidden by disk flowers; leaves mostly
                      cauline, little reduced upward; heads on short leafy peduncles; ligules of ray
                      corollas < 1 cm long                                                                    Verbesina
    11. Ray flowers yellow, sometimes with maroon, deep red, or rusty-brown toward the base.
        15. Receptacle columnar.
             16. Leaves opposite at base, may be alternate or opposite on upper stems; plants creep-
                  ing and rooting at the nodes, the flowering branches ascending                                 Acmella
             16. Leaves all alternate; plants erect.
                  17. Leaves simple, the blades entire or toothed.
                       18. Leaves clasping; achenes terete                                                      Dracopis
                       18. Leaves not clasping; achenes 4-angled                                              Rudbeckia
                  17. Leaves pinnately compound or deeply lobed                                                 Ratibida
        15. Receptacle flat, or convex, or very low conic.
             19. Leaf bases decurrent, the stems thus winged                                                  Verbesina
             19. Leaf bases not decurrent, the stems not winged.
                  20. Phyllaries dimorphic, the outer row much smaller than the inner; achenes flat-
                       tened parallel to the phyllaries (or rarely 4 angled in Bidens).
                       21. Inner phyllaries united for up to 1/3 their length; disk corolla lobes often
                           linear                                                                          Thelesperma
                       21. Phyllaries all separate or nearly so; disk corolla lobes triangular to ovate.
                           22. Pappus of 2(–4) rigid, retrorsely barbed awns                                       Bidens
                                                                                          INULEAE/ASTERACEAE        305

                        22. Pappus of 2(–4) awns or teeth which are inconspicuously barbed or
                             not barbed OR pappus absent.
                             23. Inner phyllaries spreading at anthesis; achenes not winged and
                                 disk corollas yellow                                                             Bidens
                             23. Inner phyllaries tightly enclosing heads; achenes winged and all
                                 corollas yellow OR if achenes not winged, then disk corollas red-
                                 dish brown                                                                    Coreopsis
                20. Phyllaries all similar, imbricate, or slightly unequal, not dimorphic in 2 rows;
                    achenes various.
                    24. Leaves, including upper ones, mostly opposite.
                        25. Leaves linear, 10–30 mm long, to only ca. 2 mm wide; plants erect, 8–
                             22 cm tall                                                                            Zinnia
                        25. Leaves larger, usually much so; plants either decumbent OR much
                             greater than 22 cm tall.
                             26. Plants decumbent, slender, 5–30 cm tall; ray flowers 3–8, with co-
                                 rollas 4 mm or less long; mainly a lawn weed                              Calyptocarpus
                             26. Plants erect, coarse; much taller than 30 cm; ray flowers usually 8–
                                 numerous, with corollas more than 4 mm long, usually much more;
                                 widespread in native habitats.
                                 27. Achenes not winged; ray flowers neutral, styles and stigmas
                                      absent; widespread in nc TX                                             Helianthus
                                 27. Achenes winged or with wing-like margins; ray flowers pistil-
                                      late (fertile or infertile), styles present; s and w parts of nc TX.
                                      28. Leaves with distinct petioles; petioles with conspicuous
                                          auricles basally; pappus of 2 short awns, usually absent on
                                          mature achenes; plants perennial herbs                                  Simsia
                                      28. Leaves sessile; auricles lacking; pappus of 2 or 3 short awns
                                          subtended by short, hyaline scales; plants small shrubs                Wedelia
                    24. Upper leaves alternate.
                        29. Achenes winged; petioles auriculate dilated at base OR not so                      Verbesina
                        29. Achenes not winged; petioles not auriculate.
                             30. Ray flowers neutral, styles and stigmas absent; pappus of 2 awns,
                                 these stout and early deciduous; squamellae lacking; widespread
                                 in nc TX                                                                     Helianthus
                             30. Ray flowers pistillate, styles present (but infertile); pappus of 2
                                 slender and persistent awns and 4 squamellae; s half of nc TX                  Viguieraa


         INULEAE TRIBE (INCLUDING PLUCHEEAE AND GNAPHALIEAE)
1. Plants typically small, usually < 10(–15) cm tall; heads ± completely imbedded in woolly hairs;
   pappus lacking; disk corollas (central) 4-toothed; receptacle chaffy                                            Evax
1. Plants over 10 cm tall; heads often with woolly hairs, but not completely embedded in the hairs;
   pappus of hair-like bristles present; disk corollas 3- or 5-toothed; receptacle ± naked.
   2. Plants without conspicuous white or gray woolly pubescence; middle and upper stem leaves
      broad, 10–70 mm wide; phyllaries ± herbaceous (= greenish, but often tinged purplish), not
      scarious, sometimes puberulent or with minute resin-globules; plants aromatic with distinc-
      tive camphor-like odor                                                                                   Pluchea
   2. Plants with conspicuous white or gray woolly pubescence; middle and upper stem leaves
      narrow, 1–15(–20) mm wide; phyllaries ± scarious (= dry, membranous), glabrous above the
      often woolly base; plants without camphor-like odor.
306    ASTERACEAE/LACTUCEAE

      3. Pappus of plumose bristles (use lens to see side branches) 10–11 mm long; leaves 1.5–4
         mm wide; apparently rare in nc TX                                                                     Facelis
      3. Pappus of smooth or barbellate bristles, the bristles much < 10 mm long except in Antennaria
         which has basal leaves 15–50 mm wide; leaves of various widths, often much wider than 4
         mm; widespread in nc TX.
         4. Basal and stem leaves present, the stem leaves smaller in most species; basal leaves 22
            mm or less wide (usually much less); phyllaries ± completely scarious (except midrib can
            be greenish); heads all alike, bisexual, usually numerous in elongate or terminal inflores-
            cences, the individual heads usually ± sessile in glomerules.
            5. Pappus bristles not united basally, separating individually or in clusters; inflorescences
               often spreading, somewhat flat-topped, sometimes elongate; phyllaries ± obtuse to
               acutish; flowering (Jul–)Sep–Nov                                                     Pseudognaphalium
            5. Pappus bristles united basally, deciduous as a ring of hairs; inflorescences usually ±
               elongate, spike-like; phyllaries acute to acuminate; flowering Mar–Jun                     Gamochaeta
         4. Leaves nearly all basal, the stem leaves very reduced; basal leaves 15–50 mm wide; phyl-
            laries herbaceous at least in lower half; heads of 2 kinds, the sexes on different plants,
            typically few at end of stem, the individual heads short pedunculate or solitary               Antennaria


                               LACTUCEAE (CICHORIEAE) TRIBE
1. Pappus of scales OR scales and bristles OR pappus lacking.
   2. Corollas blue, pink, or white; pappus of numerous minute scales ca. 0.2 mm long                        Cichorium
   2. Corollas yellow or yellow-orange or in one species yellow with purple teeth; pappus of scales
      and bristles, or only scales, or pappus absent.
      3. Corollas completely yellow or yellow-orange; plants ± glabrous; pappus of all flowers the
         same; achenes < 3 mm long                                                                                Krigia
      3. Corollas yellow with purple teeth; plants with conspicuous pubescence; pappus of outer
         flowers a fringed crown, ca. 1 mm long, that of inner flowers of bristle-like scales ca. 5 mm
         long; achenes 5–7.5 mm long                                                                         Hedypnois
1. Pappus of bristles or hairs.
   4. Pappus plumose (= feather-like, the bristles with long side hairs—use lens).
      5. Stems essentially leafless or with a few leaves toward base; basal leaves oblanceolate, toothed
         or pinnatifid; achene body 4–5 mm long, the beak 5 mm long or less; involucre ca. 0.8–1 cm
         high at flowering time                                                                           Hypochaeris
      5. Stems with leaves; leaves linear, grass-like, entire; achene body 10–25 mm long, the beak
         10–25 mm long; involucre ca. 2.4–4 cm high at flowering time                                      Tragopogon
   4. Pappus not plumose.
      6. Corollas blue, red, or white.
         7. Phyllaries imbricated, in several series; plants 10–30 cm tall                               Pinaropappus
         7. Phyllaries in one series or with basal row of short ones; plants usually > 30 cm tall.
            8. Achenes flattened; stems with well-developed leaves                                              Lactucaa
            8. Achenes terete; most leaves basal, stems only with a few reduced leaves or bracts           Lygodesmia
      6. Corollas yellow, or in one species yellow with purple teeth.
         9. Achenes flattened.
            10. Achenes beaked (with a thin extension between the body of the achene and the
                attachment point of the pappus), the beak usually very thin; heads with relatively
                few flowers (ca. 8–56)                                                                          Lactucaa
            10. Achenes beakless; heads with many flowers (ca. 80–250)                                         Sonchus
         9. Achenes rounded in cross-section (terete, cylindrical or fusiform).
            11. Achenes at maturity beakless or essentially so, the pappus attached at the end of the
                achene body.
                                                                                      MUTISEAE/ASTERACEAE        307

              12. Leaves entire, with conspicuous, long, spreading pubescence                             Hieracium
              12. Leaves toothed or lobed, with pubescence various.
                  13. Lower stems glabrous or with sparse pubescence; flowering involucres < 6
                      mm long; achenes 1.5–2.5 mm long                                                      Youngia
                  13. Lower stems conspicuously pubescent to the naked eye; flowering involu-
                      cres 7–12 mm long; achenes ca. 4–7.5 mm long.
                      14. Corollas with purple teeth; pappus of outer flowers a fringed crown, ca. 1
                           mm long, that of inner flowers of a few bristle-like scales ca. 5 mm long     Hedypnois
                      14. Corollas completely yellow; pappus of all flowers the same, of numerous
                           hair-like bristles 4–5 mm long                                                     Crepis
          11. Achenes at maturity with long, slender, conspicuous beaks, the pappus well-sepa-
              rated from the body of the achene (beak not visible in young flowers).
              15. Plants stemless, leaves all basal (in a rosette); beak without a ring of hairs just
                  beneath the pappus; stems unbranched, each with only a single head                     Taraxacum
              15. Plants usually with leafy stems (often 1–few leaves low on the stem); beak with a
                  ring of microscopic, reflexed hairs just beneath where the pappus attaches (use
                  lens); stems sometimes branched, each with 1–several heads                          Pyrrhopappus


                                            MUTISEAE TRIBE
Only one genus                                                                                           Chaptalia


                                         SENECIONEAE TRIBE
1. Corollas yellow; heads with both ray and disk flowers (ray flowers absent in 1 species that is rare
   in nc TX ).
   2. Stem leaves deeply toothed or pinnately lobed or compound, the upper not clasping or but
      weakly so; phyllaries not black-tipped; plants annuals or perennials; ray flowers present              Packeraa
   2. Stem leaves shallowly toothed to pinnately lobed (if pinnately lobed, then phyllaries with
      black tips and rays flowers absent), conspicuously clasping; phyllaries black-tipped or not so;
      plants annuals; ray flowers absent or present                                                          Senecio
1. Corollas white, cream, or yellowish-white; heads with only disk or disk-like flowers.
   3. Leaves entire or rarely toothed, with prominent, ± parallel longitudinal nerves (often 7–9) even-
      tually converging toward the tip; stem leaves few; heads with all florets bisexual; plants peren-
      nials; prairies and open woods, widespread in nc TX                                               Arnoglossum
   3. Leaves sharply double serrate and sometimes irregularly lobed, with but a single prominent
      midnerve (prominent, parallel, longitudinal nerves lacking); leaves well-distributed up the stem;
      heads with marginal florets pistillate; plants annuals; wet areas in extreme ne part of nc TX        Erechtites


                                          VERNONIEAE TRIBE
1. Heads in dense clusters subtended by whorls of ca. 3 leaf-like ovate bracts ca. 1 cm long; leaves
   mostly basal, much larger than the reduced stem leaves; pappus of 5 bristles; phyllaries not pur-
   plish, often pale yellowish                                                                       Elephantopus
1. Heads without a whorl of leaf-like bracts; leaves ± uniform in size and well-distributed up the
   stem; pappus a double row of numerous bristles, the outer much shorter than the inner; phyllar-
   ies often purplish                                                                                    Vernonia


                                          ACHILLEA YARROW
AA mainly n temperate genus of 115 species; many are used medicinally or cultivated as orna-
mentals. (So named because its healing powers were said to have been discovered by Achilles of
308   ASTERACEAE/ACMELLA

Greek mythology; he supposedly stopped the flow of blood from the wounds of his Myrmidon
warriors, perhaps with this plant—Arriagada & Miller 1997) (tribe Anthemideae)
REFERENCES: Mulligan & Bassett 1959; Arriagada & Miller 1997.

Achillea millefolium L., (thousand-leaved), MILFOIL, WESTERN YARROW, COMMON YARROW. Aro-
matic, woolly-pubescent, rhizomatous, perennial herb 35–100 cm tall, usually unbranched up
to the inflorescence; leaves alternate, sessile, lanceolate, 2–3 times pinnately compound, fern-
like in appearance and often confused with ferns by non-botanists, the crowded, narrow leaf-
lets finely lobed or toothed; heads small, in a dense, terminal corymbose arrangement; ray
flowers 5–12, white, rarely pinkish, the ligules ca. 2 mm long; disk corollas white or creamy
white to pinkish; pappus absent. Roadsides, disturbed sites; widespread in TX. Apr–May. [A.
lanulosa Nutt., A. millefolium var. lanulosa, A. millefolium subsp. lanulosa (Nutt.) Piper, A.
millefolium var. occidentalis DC., A. occidentalis (DC.) Raf. ex Rydb.] While this species is often
split into subspecific taxa (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997), Cronquist (1980) indicated that it
is a highly variable polyploid complex with both native and introduced forms not yet satisfac-
torily sorted into infraspecific taxa. We are thus not recognizing subspecies or varieties. When
the foliage is crushed, it releases a spicy odor. MILFOIL was attributed to have extensive curative
powers by herbals of the Middle Ages, supposedly being useful in treating such conditions as
influenza, gout, and ailments of the kidneys and liver (Wills & Irwin 1961). It was also used
medicinally by Native Americans and is still used in folk remedies; however, ingestion was re-
ported to cause irritation of mucous membranes and gastric and abdominal pain (Burlage
1968). 9

                                              ACMELLA
A A mainly tropical genus of 30 species. Previously included in and closely related to
Spilanthes. (Derivation of generic name unknown) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Jansen 1981, 1985a, 1985b.

Acmella oppositifolia (Lam.) R.K. Jansen var. repens (Walter) R.K. Jansen, (sp.: opposite-leaved;
var.: creeping), CREEPING SPOTFLOWER. Herbaceous rhizomatous perennial, creeping, rooting at
nodes; flowering branches ascending; leaves opposite, petioled; leaf blades ovate, rhombic to
deltoid, 20–40 mm long, serrate; heads few, solitary, on axillary peduncles 5–15 cm long; phyl-
laries linear, in 2 series; ray flowers few, pistillate, infertile, the ligules ca. 5 mm long, yellow; disk
flowers perfect, fertile, yellow; pales (= bracts on receptacle) about equaling disk flowers; recep-
tacles elongate, conical, 8–10 mm long in fruit; achenes black; pappus absent or rarely with 1–2
awns. Low moist areas, ditches, ponds; Grayson, Red River, and Tarrant cos., also Parker Co.
(nursery escape), also Ellis Co. (Jansen 1985a); mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. May–
Nov. [A. repens (Walter) Rich., Spilanthes americana (Mutis) Hieron. var. repens (Walter) A.H.
Moore]

                              AMBLYOLEPIS HUISACHE DAISY
AA monotypic genus endemic to the sw United States and Mexico; previously treated in
Helenium. (Greek: ambly, blunt, and lepis, scale) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes lumped into
Heliantheae)
REFERENCE: Bierner 1990.

Amblyolepis setigera DC., (bristle-bearing), HUISACHE DAISY. Small annual 10–50 cm tall with
odor resembling recently cut Medicago hay or Melilotus; stems and leaf margins with long,
wide-spreading, cottony hairs; leaves sessile, entire, the lowest oblanceolate, the upper ovate
and clasping; heads long-peduncled and large, the involucres 7–11 mm high; phyllaries in about
2 rows, slightly unequal, lanceolate, subappressed; ray and disk corollas yellow; disk hemi-
                                                                                        AMBROSIA/ASTERACEAE         309

spherical-ovoid; achenes with a cage-like exterior of stout, separate ribs. Sandy or rocky open
ground; Brown, Mills, and Shackelford cos., also Comanche and Hamilton cos. (HPC); se TX and
w part of nc TX w to w TX. Mar–Jul. [Helenium setigerum (DC.) Britton & Rusby]

                                          AMBROSIA RAGWEED
Annual or perennial herbs, 0.3–3+ m tall; leaves alternate, alternate above and opposite below,
or opposite, nearly sessile to petioled, palmately lobed or pinnatifid, sometimes aromatic; flow-
ers unisexual, in separate heads, these on the same plant; staminate heads in spike-like or
raceme-like inflorescences; phyllaries united and cup-shaped; anthers distinct; pistillate heads
1 or few-flowered, axillary, below the staminate; phyllaries united, enclosing the achenes at
maturity, forming a hard indehiscent “bur” or “fruit,” the bur often with the tips of the phyllar-
ies projecting as spines or tubercles; corollas and pappus absent.
AA cosmopolitan, but especially American genus of 43 species. The flowers of Ambrosia spe-
cies are small and wind-pollinated; the abundant air-borne pollen is a problematic cause of al-
lergic reactions during the fall and is considered the leading cause of hay fever in the U.S.
(Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977). The allergic response is initiated when pollen grain proteins (anti-
gens) attach to receptors on antibodies (immunoglobulin E—IgE) linked to immune system
cells. This results in the immune cells releasing histamines which are the molecules directly re-
sponsible for the symptoms known as hay fever (Kuby 1997; Lim 1998). A cladistic study by
Karis (1995) suggested that Xanthium is a monophyletic clade in a paraphyletic Ambrosia.
(Early Greek name for aromatic plants; the mythic food of the gods) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Rydberg 1922; Payne 1964; Lee & Dickinson 1980; Lee 1981; Karis 1995.

1. Leaves 3–5-lobed or sometimes unlobed.
     2. Side lobes of leaves basically a large tooth on each side, these a small fraction as large as
        the middle lobe; lobes or whole leaf (if unlobed) 12 mm wide or less; plants < 1 m tall; sap
        not red; staminate heads sessile                                                                  A. bidentata
     2. Side lobes of leaves not much smaller than the middle lobe; lobes or whole leaf > 12 mm
        wide (often much more); plants 1–3(–5) m tall; sap often red; staminate heads on short stalks
                                                                                                               A. trifida
1. Leaves pinnatifid, divided into numerous narrow segments.
   3. Leaves 1–4 times pinnatifid, parsley-like in appearance, with petioles to 15 cm long (longest
      on lower leaves); staminate involucres to 10 mm across; spines of the bur (0–)10–20, in several
      series on the upper 2/3 of the body of the bur; rare in nc TX                                     A. confertifolia
   3. Leaves 1–3 times pinnatifid, but not parsley-like, subsessile or with petioles to only 3 cm long;
      staminate involucres ca. 2.5–3 mm across; spines or tubercles of the bur 5–7, in a single series
      near the middle to the apex (= beak) of the bur; widespread throughout nc TX.
      4. Stem leaves petioled; plants annuals with a taproot; female involucres with 5–7 short spines
                                                                                                      A. artemisiifolia
      4. Stem leaves essentially sessile; plants perennials from creeping rootstocks; female involu-
         cres with 4–6 short, stout tubercules, these sometimes obscure                                 A. psilostachya a

Ambrosia artemisiifolia L., (with leaves like Artemisia —sagebrush, wormwood), COMMON RAG-
WEED, ROMAN WORMWOOD, SHORT RAGWEED, ALTAMISA, HOGBRAKE. Annual; stems 0.3–1 m tall;
leaves opposite or uppermost sometimes alternate, pinnatifid to bipinnatifid, with petioles usu-
ally 10–30 mm long; staminate heads short-stalked; “fruits” ca. 3 mm long, obovoid in outline,
the spines subulate. Disturbed areas; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov.

Ambrosia bidentata Michx., (two-toothed), SOUTHERN RAGWEED, LANCE-LEAF RAGWEED. An-
nual; stems 0.3–1 m tall; leaves alternate above, opposite towards base, sessile, narrowly ovate, 3–
5 cm long, usually with a broad tooth or small lobe on each side at the blade base; staminate
310   ASTERACEAE/ANTENNARIA

heads sessile with oblique involucre; “fruits” ca. 5 mm long, 4-angled, the spines 4. Prairies;
Grayson and Lamar cos. in Red River drainage and Bowie Co. and Sabine Co. (G. Nesom, pers.
comm.) in extreme e TX are apparently the only records for the state. Aug–Sep.

Ambrosia confertiflora DC., (with flowers crowded together), FIELD RAGWEED, BUR-SAGE. Peren-
nial, forming colonies; stems 0.3–0.6(–1.8) m tall; leaves alternate, 1–4 times pinnatifid, often
with 1–several pair of small lobes on the petiolar bases below the main blade; staminate heads
short-stalked; “fruits” ca. 5 mm long, the spines usually (0–)10–20, ca. 1–2 mm long, with
hooked tips. Disturbed areas; mainly w 1/2 of TX e to Brown and Mills cos. on w margin of nc
TX, disjunct e to Dallas Co. Mostly Aug–Nov.

Ambrosia psilostachya DC., (naked spike), WESTERN RAGWEED, PERENNIAL RAGWEED. Perennial,
forming colonies; stems 0.3–0.6(–1+) m tall; leaves pinnatifid, sessile; staminate heads short-
stalked; “fruits” ca. 2.5 mm long, obovoid in outline, the tubercles acute or blunt. Disturbed ar-
eas; nearly throughout TX. Aug–Nov. [A. cumanensisof authors, not Kunth] Used as a medicinal
tea by Native Americans.; also apparently inhibits the growth of some other organisms through
allelopathy (Cheatham & Johnston 1995).

Ambrosia trifida L. var. texana Scheele, (sp.: three-parted; var.: of Texas), BLOOD RAGWEED, GIANT
RAGWEED, BUFFALOWEED. Annual; sap blood red; stems often very tall, 1–3(–5) m tall; leaves usu-
ally opposite, palmately 3(–5)-lobed or uppermost rarely unlobed, scabrous on both sides, ex-
tremely so on upper surface, petioled; staminate heads stalked; “fruits” ca. 4 mm long, obovoid
in outline, the tubercles 4–8, small or obsolete. Disturbed areas, often extremely abundant;
nearly throughout the state except s TX and Trans-Pecos. Aug–Nov. The sap stains the hands
red if the tissues are damaged.

          ANTENNARIA PUSSY-TOES, EVERLASTING, LADIES’-TOBACCO
AA temperate and warm area genus of 71 species of small dioecious herbs; some are cultivated
as rock garden subjects. (Latin: antenna; the pappus of the male flowers have swollen tips re-
sembling a butterfly’s antennae) (tribe Inuleae)
REFERENCES: Bayer & Stebbins 1982; Bayer 1984, 1985; Anderberg 1991.

Antennaria parlinii Fernald subsp. fallax R.J. Bayer & Stebbins, (sp.: for its discoverer, John
Crawford Parlin, 1863–1948, of Maine; subsp.: deceptive), LARGE-LEAF PUSSY-TOES, PLAIN-LEAF
PUSSY-TOES. Small stoloniferous perennial to 25(–35) cm tall, gray-pubescent with matted,
woolly hairs; leaves simple, entire, prominently 3- to 5-nerved, with conspicuously different
upper and lower surfaces, olive green and glabrate above, gray woolly below; heads terminal,
few, in a cymose cluster, unisexual; phyllaries with scarious or white tips; ray flowers absent;
staminate flowers with prominent black-brown anthers; pistillate flowers with prominent,
white, hair-like pappus; achenes < 1 mm long. Sandy woods; e TX w to West Cross Timbers.
Mar–Apr. [A. fallax Greene] Thought to be a polyploid of hybrid origin (Bayer & Stebbins 1982;
Bayer 1985).

                ANTHEMIS MAYWEED, DOG-FENNEL, CHAMOMILE
AAn Old World genus of ca. 210 species ranging from Europe through the Mediterranean re-
gion to Iran and e Africa; some are medicinal; others are cultivated as ornamentals. (Greek
name for the related Chamaemelum nobile (L.) All., camomile; probably derived from
anthemon, flower) (tribe Anthemideae)
REFERENCE: Arriagada & Miller 1997.

Anthemis cotula L., (small cup), MAYWEED CHAMOMILE, MAYWEED, DOG-FENNEL, STINKING CAMO-
MILE, STINKWEED. Rankly aromatic, slightly and inconspicuously pubescent, annual to 60 cm
                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS            311




                                                      /
                                              ?




                                Achillea millefolium [REE]               Acmella oppositifolia var. repens [CO1]




                                                               ?




 Amblyolepis setigera [HEA]                                    /




                               Ambrosia artemisiifolia [REE]                 Ambrosia bidentata [BB2]




                                                               ?


                                                               /
                                                                                                             ?

                                                                                                             /

Ambrosia confertiflora [PAR]   Ambrosia psilostachya [REE]                   Ambrosia trifida var. texana [REE]
312   ASTERACEAE/APHANOSTEPHUS

tall; leaves alternate, finely and deeply cut, twice compound or pinnately lobed; heads corym-
bose; phyllaries appressed, scarious-margined; ray flowers 10–14 per head, sterile, persistent
and reflexed in age, the ligules white, ca. 7–12 mm long; disk ovoid-conical; disk corollas green-
ish yellow; achenes 1–1.5 mm long; pappus absent. Sandy roadsides, pastures, disturbed areas;
cultivated and escaped; Dallas, Denton, Fannin, Grayson, Hopkins, Kaufman, and Palo Pinto
cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX. Apr–May. Native of Europe. Reverchon (1880) stated that its intro-
duction in Dallas Co. dates from 1875. Source of an insecticide and reported to taint cow’s milk
(Mabberley 1987); related to Chamaemelum nobile, which is the source of the stomach remedy
camomile. I

                         APHANOSTEPHUS LAZY DAISY, DOZE DAISY
Annual or perennial herbs; leaves alternate, with narrowed, petiolar base; blades linear to ob-
long-oblanceolate, varying from entire to pinnately lobed; heads solitary or corymbose; ray
flowers with ligules white to pink, often rose-red or rose-purple beneath, spreading from mid-
morning to late afternoon, erect at night; disk corollas yellow; pappus minute to small, 1 mm or
less long.

AA genus of 4 species endemic to the United States and Mexico. The common names refer to
the flowers remaining closed until mid-morning or later (Ajilvsgi 1984); the often rose-red or
rose-purple undersides of the unopened ray flowers are conspicuous (Kirkpatrick 1992). (Pre-
sumably from Greek: aphanes, unseen or hidden, and stephanus, crown, presumably from the
inconspicuous pappus) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1946c; Turner 1984, Elisens et al. 1992.

1. Plants soft-pubescent to hispid-pubescent with spreading to reflexed hairs (usually < 1 mm
   long); heads not crowded, on long peduncles naked for 15–100 mm below the heads (to 150
   mm in age); ray flowers 16–85 per head.
   2. Ray flowers with ligules 5–10 mm long; pappus a ring of minute subequal hairs 0.25 mm or
      less long; bases of disk corollas only slightly enlarged at maturity; plants taprooted annuals or
      clump-forming perennials; w part of nc TX.
      3. Ray flowers usually 16–32 per head; plants annuals from slender taproot                      A. ramosissimus
      3. Ray flowers 40–85 (as few as 25 in second flowering of summer and fall) per head; plants
         perennials forming clumps from branched, woody root                                                 A. riddellii
   2. Ray flowers with ligules 8–15 mm long; pappus an uneven crown of ca. 5 small acute scales
      0.25–1 mm long; bases of disk corollas becoming swollen (to 2 times or more their original
      diam.) and hardened at maturity; plants taprooted annuals; widespread in nc TX                    A. skirrhobasis
1. Plants conspicuously hispid with long (0.7–2.2 mm long), coarse, jointed, translucent hairs spread-
   ing at right angles; heads ± crowded, on short peduncles naked for only 3–12 mm below the
   heads (to 25 mm in age); ray flowers 12–18                                                                 A. pilosus

Aphanostephus pilosus Buckley, (pilose, with long soft hairs), HAIRY LAZY DAISY. Small annual;
stems 6–33 cm tall; involucres 4.5–5.5 mm high, 4–6 mm wide; ligule 5–7 mm long, white to
rosy-lavender, especially upon withering; pappus a cup-like, small, scaly crown 0.3–0.4 mm
tall. Sandy or silty soils; low prairies, draws, and ditches; Archer, Clay, and Jack cos. in w part of
nc TX; Rolling Plains and West Cross Timbers; also disjunct e to Red River Co. May–Jun.

Aphanostephus ramosissimus DC., (much-branched), PLAINS LAZY DAISY, ARIZONA LAZY DAISY.
More or less soft pubescent annual, often widely branched and partly decumbent; stems 5–45
cm tall; involucres 3.3–5 mm high, 5–9 mm wide; ligule 5.5–7.5 mm long, white or becoming
rose to purple, especially on lower surface; pappus minute, to 0.25 mm long. Sandy open woods,
fields, prairies, and roadsides; Archer and Erath cos., also disjunct e to Tarrant Co., also Callahan
Co. (Shinners 1946c); w part of nc TX s and w to w TX; Apr–Jun(–Aug).
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        313




      Anthemis cotula [ REE]




                                                                                      Aphanostephus pilosus [BT3]
                                   Antennaria parlinii subsp. fallax [HEA]




Aphanostephus ramosissimus [MAR]   Aphanostephus riddellii [ JON]            Aphanostephus skirrhobasis [BB2]
314   ASTERACEAE/ARNOGLOSSUM

Aphanostephus riddellii Torr. & A. Gray, (for John Leonard Riddell, 1807–1865, botanist),
RIDDELL’S LAZY DAISY. Hispid-pubescent perennial; stems 10–50 cm tall; heads usually numer-
ous, rather large and long-peduncled; involucres 4.5–6.2 mm high, 9–14 mm wide; ligule 7–10 mm
long, white; pappus minute, to 0.2 mm long. Rocky or sandy ground, chiefly on limestone; Bur-
net, Coleman, and Shackleford cos. on w margin of nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr–Jun(–Jul–Oct).

Aphanostephus skirrhobasis (DC.) Trel., (possibly white parasol rosy at base, from the ligules
colored on the lower surface), ARKANSAS LAZY DAISY. Soft, gray-pubescent annual from a tap-
root; stems to 50 cm tall; heads rather large; involucres 6–8 mm high, 7–13 mm wide; ray flowers
20–44 with ligules 8–15 mm long, white or reddish to rosy on the lower surface, the color often
streaked; pappus minute, 0.25–1 mm long. Sandy open woods, fields, prairies, and roadsides;
widespread in TX. Apr–Jun, sporadically later. Sometimes cultivated as an ornamental. m/78

                          ARNOGLOSSUM INDIAN-PLANTAIN
AA genus of 7 species native to the e United States; previously recognized in Cacalia. (Presum-
ably from Greek: arnos, lamb, and glossa, tongue) (tribe Senecioneae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1950c; Robinson 1974; Pippen 1978.

Arnoglossum plantagineum Raf., (resembling Plantago—plantain), PRAIRIE-PLANTAIN, GROOVE-
STEM INDIAN-PLANTAIN, TUBEROUS INDIAN-PLANTAIN. Glabrous, coarse perennial from fleshy-fi-
brous roots, 0.5–1(–1.5) m tall; stems striate-angled, often dark purple; basal leaves conspicuous,
5–15+ cm long, 2–8 cm wide, long-petioled, the blades elliptic or ovate, entire or rarely toothed,
somewhat thick and fleshy, with prominent ± parallel, longitudinal nerves (often 7–9) eventu-
ally converging toward the tip; stem leaves relatively few, alternate, much smaller, the upper
subsessile; heads numerous in a broad corymbose arrangement at apex of plant; phyllaries 5, 7–
10 mm long, with narrow, sharp, prominent keel; ray flowers absent; disk corollas 5, creamy
white; achenes 4–5 mm long; pappus of numerous slender bristles. Prairies, fields, and open
woods; se and e TX w to Denton, Grayson, McLennan, Tarrant, and Williamson cos., also
Hamilton (HPC) and Somervell (Fossil Rim Wildlife Center—R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; also
Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun, rarely late Sep–Nov. [Cacalia plantaginea (Raf.) Shinners]. The strik-
ing leaves and erect flowering stalks make this species a conspicuous spring component of
many nc TX prairies and fields.

The only other Arnoglossumspecies in TX, A. ovatum (Walter) H. Rob. (LANCE-LEAF INDIAN-
PLANTAIN), occurs in se and e TX. It has lanceolate leaves, phyllaries without keels, and flowers
from Jul–Oct.

      ARTEMISIA SAGEBRUSH, WORMWOOD, SAGEWORT, SAGE, MUGWORT
Ours perennial or biennial herbs or slightly subshrubby below; white-pubescent or nearly gla-
brous, often aromatic; leaves alternate, entire or deeply lobed, the segments linear to oblong, el-
liptical, or ovate; heads small, in numerous panicles; involucres white-woolly or nearly gla-
brous; ray flowers fertile or infertile, 1–few; corollas yellowish white; disk flowers fertile or
infertile, corollas minute, yellowish white; achenes ca. 1 mm or less long; pappus absent.

AA genus of ca. 350 species of the n temperate area, w South America, and s Africa; usually in
dry areas. Artemisia species are wind-pollinated and cause allergies; they are typically aro-
matic shrubs and herbs; Artemisia tridentata Nutt. is the famous SAGEBRUSH widespread in the
w 1/2 of the U.S.; TARRAGON, a culinary herb, is obtained from the Eurasian A. dracunculus L.;
the WORMWOOD of the Bible is A. herba-alba Asso; the harmful green liqueur, absinthe, is made
from the European A. absinthium L. (Ancient name of Artemisia vulgaris L., MUGWORT, from
Greek goddess of the hunt, Artemis, or possibly from Artemisia, wife of Mausolus, king of
Caria) (tribe Anthemideae)
                                                                                            ASTER/ASTERACEAE       315

REFERENCES: Hall & Clements 1923; McArthur & Welch 1984; Arriagada & Miller 1997.
1. Leaf blades nearly glabrous, usually very deeply and finely dissected, the divisions linear to thread-
   like, 2 mm wide or less; foliage not aromatic; disk flowers sterile; on extreme w margin of nc TX       A. campestris
1. Leaf blades conspicuously grayish or whitish woolly on both surfaces or at least on lower sur-
   faces, entire to lobed or dissected, the main axis and lobes usually 3–10+ mm wide; foliage aro-
   matic; disk flowers all fertile; throughout nc TX                                                      A. ludoviciana

Artemisia campestris L. subsp. caudata (Michx.) H.M. Hall & Clem., (sp.: of the fields or plains;
subsp.: tailed), WESTERN SAGEWORT, THREAD-LEAF SAGEWORT. Biennial or weakly perennial herb
30–90 cm tall; involucres essentially glabrous, 2.5–4 mm high. Roadsides, prairies, open areas;
Callahan Co. on extreme w margin of nc TX; mainly Plains Country and Trans-Pecos. Sep–Oct.
[A. caudata Michx.]

Artemisia ludoviciana Nutt. subsp. mexicana (Willd. ex Spreng.) D.D. Keck, (sp.: of Louisiana;
subsp.: of Mexico) MEXICAN SAGEBRUSH. Perennial herb, rarely slightly subshrubby, 20–90(–150)
cm tall; leaves very variable in shape, usually some lobed or dissected but varying to entire, also
variable in terms of pubescence, the young leaves white woolly above and below to glabrate and
dark green above and white woolly below; inflorescences compact to open diffuse; involucres
grayish or white woolly, 2.5–4+ mm high. Prairies, disturbed habitats; widespread throughout
most of TX. Oct–Nov. [A. ludoviciana var. mexicana Willd. ex Spreng.] According to Jones et al.
(1997) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997), subsp. ludoviciana does not occur in TX.

                                                      ASTER
Ours herbaceous perennials (1 species annual); leaves alternate, simple, entire to toothed; heads
usually numerous; ray flowers fertile, the ligule often conspicuous, white to pink, blue, violet, or
purplish, never yellow; disk flowers perfect, the corollas yellow to rose, purple, or blue; phyllar-
ies imbricated, the tips usually green; receptacles naked; achenes somewhat flattened; pappus
of hair-like bristles, white.

AMabberley (1997) viewed Aster as a large genus of ca. 250 species found in America, Eurasia,
and Africa; a number are cultivated; many species hybridize and intergrade; definite identifica-
tion is often difficult. Nesom (1994b) treated Aster as an essentially Old World genus of ca. 180
species; he divided the New World taxa traditionally recognized in Aster into 13 genera (num-
ber of species in parentheses): Ampelaster (1), Almutaster (1), Chloracantha (1), Canadanthus
(1), Doellingeria (11 total, 3 from North America, 8 from Asia), Eucephalus (11), Eurybia (28),
Ionactis (5), Oclemena (3), Oreostemma (3), Psilactis (6), Sericocarpus (5), and Symphyotrichum
(97). All nc TX Aster species fall into Symphyotrichum. Until consensus is reached on generic
circumscription in the Asteraceae, we are following the conservative approach in maintaining
all nc TX species (except Chloracantha) in the genus Aster; however, appropriate synonymy is
provided. Semple et al. (1996) also retained Symphyotrichumin Aster. (Greek, aster, a star, from
the radiate heads) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1953e; Jones, A. 1978a, 1978b, 1980, 1983, 1984, 1987, 1992; Semple &
Brouillet 1980a, 1980b; Jones, A. & Young 1983; Jones, R. 1983; Semple & Chmielewski 1987;
Nesom 1994b, 1997a; Semple et al. 1996.

1. Uppermost leaves crowding heads, not much reduced in size, sometimes canescent, longer and
   broader than phyllaries, partly hiding phyllaries or grading into them; head-bearing branchlets
   few, usually only 10–30 per plant; heads 20–30 mm in diam. when ligules fully extended.
   2. Outer phyllaries glabrous to slightly pubescent, 2–3 mm wide, marginally with a fringe of minute
      cilia; involucres 10–20 mm wide; widespread in nc TX                                                A. pratensis
   2. Outer phyllaries with antrorse-appressed whitish pubescence, 1.3–2 mm wide, not distinctly
      fringed; involucres 7–12 mm wide; rare in nc TX                                                      A. sericeus
316    ASTERACEAE/ASTER

1. Uppermost leaves not crowding or hiding phyllaries, usually reduced in size, not canescent, smaller
   than phyllaries; head-bearing branchlets usually more numerous than 30 per plant; heads often
   smaller than 20 mm in diam.
   2. Phyllaries with greenish, linear (very narrow) midrib; leaves on the branches usually subulate,
      tapered from base to apex, usually ± entire; head-bearing branchlets usually not very leafy
      (reduced bracts present).
      3. Ligules of ray flowers usually white; leaves small or nearly absent; plants superficially reed-
         like, usually without well-developed leaves; usually some branchlets developed into thorns;
         plants perennials forming colonies from creeping rhizomes                                           see Chloracantha
      3. Ligules of ray flowers white, violet, purplish, blue, or pink; leaves well-developed, at least
         basally; plants not reed-like; thorns absent; plants annuals from a taproot                               A. subulatus
   2. Phyllaries with greenish central midrib narrowly to broadly rhomboid (= diamond-shaped) or
      obovate; leaves on the branches often ovate to lanceolate or linear (rarely subulate), often
      serrate; head bearing branchlets leafy or not so.
      4. Stem leaves sessile and conspicuously auriculate-clasping                                                     A. patens
      4. Stem leaves sessile or petiolate, not auriculate-clasping.
         5. Phyllaries, peduncles, and often also the leaves and upper stems glandular (use lens);
            basal and lower cauline leaves sessile                                                             A. oblongifolius
         5. Phyllaries, peduncles, leaves, and stems varying from glabrous to hairy, but not glandular;
            basal and lower cauline leaves sessile to petiolate.
            6. Longest phyllaries usually only ca. 3–4 mm long, obtuse, with a fringe of a few short
                cilia; ligules of ray flowers white                                                                 A. ericoides
            6. Longest phyllaries usually longer than 4 mm OR ciliate fringe absent; ligules of ray
                flowers white OR variously colored.
                7. Basal and lower stem leaves with long, winged petiolar bases quite distinct from
                   the much wider well-delimited blade portion.
                   8. Stem leaves usually cordate (sometimes truncate) where narrowed to petiolar
                        base; leaves of inflorescence obovate to elliptic or lanceolate, not linear; middle
                        and sometimes even upper stem leaves sharply serrate                                    A. drummondii
                   8. Stem leaves usually rounded or truncate or even attenuate where narrowed to
                        petiolar base; leaves of inflorescence linear; middle and upper stem leaves usu-
                        ally entire                                                                         A. oolentangiensis
                7. Basal and lower stem leaves sessile or gradually narrowed to base, not distinctly
                   differentiated into petiolar and blade portions.
                   9. Mid-stem leaves linear, only 10–25(–34) mm long, 1–3(–5) mm wide; leaves of the
                        head-bearing branchlets numerous, linear-subulate                                           A. dumosus
                   9. Mid-stem leaves usually wider than linear, usually averaging longer than 20 mm,
                        3–20 mm wide; leaves of head-bearing branchlets variable but often wider than
                        linear-subulate.
                        10. Leaves on the ultimate branchlets just below heads < 1 mm wide, scale-like
                                                                                                            A. oolentangiensis
                        10. Leaves on the ultimate branchlets just below heads 2 mm or more wide, not
                             scale-like.
                             11. Phyllaries usually not greatly differentiated in size, the outer smallest ones
                                 (1/3–)1/2 or more as long as the inner; disk corolla limb (= flaring portion
                                 above tube) not deeply divided, the lobes < 1/2 the length of limb; heads
                                 10–25 mm in diam. when ligules fully extended; ray flowers 15–40, the
                                 ligules bluish white, lavender, or white.
                                 12. Reticulate brownish veins usually conspicuous on lower leaf surface
                                     (use lens), the enclosed areolae ± isodiametric; ray flowers 15–25, the
                                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS         317




                                                  Arnoglossum plantagineum [BB2]            Artemisia campestris subsp. caudata [BB2]




Artemisia ludoviciana subsp. mexicana [GLE ]




                                                 Aster drummondii var. texanus [HEA]                 Aster dumosus [HEA]




          Aster ericoides [DIL]                Aster lanceolatus subsp. hesperius [UWA]    Aster lanceolatus subsp. lanceolatus [UWA]
318   ASTERACEAE/ASTER

                             ligules usually bluish white or lavender (rarely white); achenes brown
                             or purple at maturity; widespread in nc TX                                  A. praealtus
                         12. Reticulate brownish veins not conspicuous on the lower leaf surface,
                             the inconspicuous areolae not isodiametric; ray flowers 20–40, the
                             ligules usually white; achenes gray at maturity; apparently rare in
                             nc TX                                                                     A. lanceolatus
                     11. Phyllaries more differentiated in size, the outer smaller ones 1/3 as long as
                         the inner; disk corolla limb deeply divided, the lobes ca. 1/2–3/4 the length
                         of the limb; heads small, 8–13 mm in diam. when ligules fully extended;
                         ray flowers 9–15(–20), the ligules white                                      A. lateriflorus

Aster drummondii Lindl. var. texanus (E.S. Burgess) A.G. Jones, (sp.: for its discoverer, Thomas
Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish botanist and collector in North America; var.: of Texas), TEXAS
ASTER. Perennial with short rhizomes; stem leaves ovate to cordate, large, 6–12(–15) cm long, 3–
5(–6) cm wide, persistent, with broadly winged petioles; uppermost leaves reduced; involucres
5–6 mm high; ray flowers 10–20, the ligules usually deep purple to blue-lavender (rarely white);
disk corollas cream to yellow, turning purple with age. Open woods and prairies; se and e TX w
to West Cross Timbers and e edge of Edwards Plateau. Mostly Oct–Nov, rarely Mar–Apr. [A.
texanus E.S. Burgess, A. texanus subsp. texanus (E.S. Burgess) A.G. Jones, Symphyotrichum
drummondii (Lindl.) G.L. Nesom var. texanum (E.S. Burgess) G.L. Nesom]

Aster dumosus L., (bushy), BUSHY ASTER, RICE-BUTTON ASTER. Perennial, rhizomatous; stem leaves
linear, 10–25(–34) mm long, 1–3(–5) mm wide, often falling early; leaves of the head-bearing
branches numerous, minute, bract-like, linear-oblong; heads 8–15 mm in diam. when ligules
are fully extended; involucres 3–5 mm high; ray flowers 4–7(–8) mm long, pink, lavender, bluish
white, or sometimes white. Low areas, roadsides, sandy or clay soils; Lamar Co. in Red River
drainage; mainly se and e TX. Aug–Oct. [A. dumosusvar. cordifolius (Michx.) Torr. & A. Gray, A.
dumosus var. subulifolius Torr. & A. Gray, Symphyotrichumdumosum (L.) G.L. Nesom] We are
following Hatch et al. (1990) and Jones (1992) in not distinguishing varieties.

Aster ericoides L., (resembling Erica —heath), HEATH ASTER, WHITE PRAIRIE ASTER, WREATH ASTER.
Perennial, rhizomatous, usually much branched; stem leaves linear or oblong, sessile, entire,
usually lost before flowering time; leaves of branchlets 2–3 mm long and ca. 1 mm wide, persis-
tent; heads crowded; involucres 4–7 mm broad; ray flowers with ligules white, slightly exceed-
ing the pappus. Disturbed or open areas; widespread in TX. Sep–Oct(–Nov). [Symphyotrichum
ericoides (L.) G.L. Nesom]

Aster lanceolatus Willd., (lanceolate, lance-shaped), PANICLED ASTER, TALL WHITE ASTER. Rhi-
zomatous perennial; basal and larger stem leaves early deciduous; main stem leaves sessile or
subsessile, elliptic or oblanceolate to linear-lanceolate (4–)6–15 cm long, (0.5–)1–2(–3.5) cm
wide; ray flowers with ligules white (rarely pink). Low areas. Aug–Nov. Similar to and appar-
ently hybridizes and intergrades with A. praealtus (Jones 1984; Jones 1992). Semple and
Chmielewski (1987) separated the 2 nc TX subspecies as follows:

1. Outer phyllaries 2/3 length or more of inner ones; heads usually subtended by large leafy bracts
                                                                                                  subsp. hesperius
1. Outer phyllaries 1/3–2/3 length of inner ones; heads not usually subtended by large leafy bracts
                                                                                                subsp. lanceolatus

subsp. hesperius (A. Gray) Semple & Chmiel., (of the west), SISKIYOU ASTER. Included based on
citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990) and range map in Semple and
Chmielewski (1987); Semple and Chmielewski (1987) mapped this subspecies as occurring in
                                                                                           ASTER/ASTERACEAE       319

the ne 1/4 of TX. [A. hesperius A. Gray, Symphyotrichum lanceolatum (Willd.) G.L. Nesom
subsp. hesperium (A. Gray) G.L. Nesom]

subsp. lanceolatus. Dallas Co., also Tarrant Co. (BAYLU); Semple & Chmielewski (1987) map this
subspecies as occurring over the w 2/3 of TX. [A. simplex Willd., A. lanceolatus var. simplex
(Willd) A.G. Jones, Symphyotrichumlanceolatum (Willd.) G.L. Nesom]

Aster lateriflorus (L.) Britton, (with one-sided flower clusters), CALIFORNIA ASTER, CALICO ASTER,
SIDE-FLOWER ASTER, STARVED ASTER, WHITE WOODLAND ASTER. Rhizomatous perennial; larger
stem leaves persistent at least in part, sessile or subsessile, elliptic-oblanceolate or linear (3–)5–
10(–15) cm long, (0.2–)1–2(–3.5) cm wide; heads small, 0.8–1.3 cm in diam. when ligules are fully
extended; ray flowers with ligules ca. 3–4 mm long, white. Well-drained uplands; Fannin,
Henderson, Hopkins, Kaufman, and Limestone cos.; se and e TX w to e part of nc TX. Sep–Oct. [A.
lateriflorus var. flagellaris, A. lateriflorus var. indutus Shinners, Symphyotrichumlateriflorum
(L.) Á. Löve and D. Löve] Because of intergradation, we are following Correll and Johnston
(1970), Hatch et al. (1990), and Jones (1992) in not distinguishing varieties in this species.

Aster oblongifolius Nutt., (oblong-leaved), AROMATIC ASTER, OBLONG-LEAF ASTER. Rhizomatous
perennial; leaves numerous; stem leaves oblong to linear-lanceolate, often subclasping, some
usually persistent throughout flowering; leaves of the branchlets 3–10 mm long, 1–2 mm wide;
heads not crowded; involucres 8–12 mm broad; phyllaries glandular-pubescent apically; ray
flowers with ligules usually blue or purple. Calcareous soils, prairies; Denton and Grayson cos.
in East Cross Timbers w to Rolling Plains and s to Edwards Plateau. Sep–Nov. [Symphyotrichum
oblongifolium(Nutt.) G.L. Nesom]

Aster oolentangiensis Riddell, (of Oolentangy [Olentangy] River in Ohio), AZURE ASTER, SKY-BLUE
ASTER. Perennial; rhizomes short; basal and lower stem leaves truncate or rounded (rarely cor-
date), persistent; petioles winged; head-bearing branchlets with minute leaves; heads 10–25 mm
in diam. when ligules fully expanded; involucres 5–8 mm high; ray flowers 10–25, with ligules
blue or violet-purple (rarely white); disk flowers yellow, turning purple with age. Dry, sandy ar-
eas; Grayson and Henderson cos.; e TX w rarely to nc TX. Sep–Nov. [A. azureus Lindl.,
Symphyotrichumoolentangiense (Riddell) G.L. Nesom]

Aster patens Aiton, (spreading), SPREADING ASTER, LATE PURPLE ASTER, SKY-DROP ASTER. Rhizoma-
tous perennial; stem leaves obovate or spoon-shaped, conspicuously clasping, grayish green;
leaves of head-bearing branchlets different, small, appressed; flowering heads showy, 20–35 mm
in diam. when ray flowers fully extended; involucres 7–15 mm broad; phyllary tips often glan-
dular-pubescent; ray flowers 10–15(–17) mm long, the ligules usually blue or purple (rarely pink
or white). Disturbed or open, often sandy areas. Aug–Nov. Three intergrading and often diffi-
cult to distinguish varieties are reported from nc TX and separated by Jones (1992) as follows:

1. Involucres 8–10 mm high, broadly turbinate; median phyllaries ovate-lanceolate, 1.2–1.5 mm in
   width, obtuse, not squarrose and not obviously glandular, although sometimes with minute glands
   on the abaxial surface that are obscured by a densely canescent-strigillose indument           var. patentissimus
1. Involucres usually < 8 mm high, campanulate or slenderly turbinate; median phyllaries linear-
   lanceolate, usually < 1.2 mm in width, acute or acuminate, often at least somewhat squarrose,
   and distinctly glandular.
   2. Plants robust; principal cauline leaves 3–6(–8) cm long and 1–2 cm wide; median phyllaries 1–
      1.2 mm in width, sparsely strigillose on the abaxial surface mainly along the midrib, the
      glandularity usually very pronounced                                                                 var. patens
   2. Plants slender-stemmed; principal cauline leaves 1–3(–4) cm long and 0.5–1(–1.5) cm wide;
      median phyllaries slender, usually < 1 mm in width, densely cinereous-puberulent on the abaxial
      surface, the glandularity less pronounced                                                           var. gracilis
320   ASTERACEAE/ASTER

var. gracilis Hook., (graceful). Predominantly diploid (2n = 10). Se and e TX w to West Cross Tim-
bers; also Edwards Plateau; by far the most common of the 3 varieties in nc TX.
[Symphyotrichumpatens (Aiton) G.L. Nesom var. gracile (Hook.) G.L. Nesom]

var. patens. SKY-DROP ASTER. Mostly tetraploid (2n = 20). Included based on citation of vegeta-
tional areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); se and e TX w to nc TX. [Symphyotrichum
patens var. patens]

var. patentissimus (Lindl. ex DC.) Torr. & A. Gray, (much-spreading). Mostly tetraploid (2n = 20).
Included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e
TX. [Symphyotrichumpatens var. patentissimum (Lindl. ex DC.) G.L. Nesom]

Aster praealtus Poir., (very tall), WILLOW-LEAF ASTER, WILL ASTER, TALL ASTER. Perennial, rhi-
zomatous; stem leaves sessile, linear to narrowly elliptic, 4–12(–15) cm long, 0.3–1.5 cm wide;
lower ones falling early; leaves of the head-bearing branchlets very small and subulate or linear
subulate; flowering heads 15–20(–25) mm in diam. when the ray flowers are fully extended; in-
volucres ca. 4–8 mm high; ray flowers with ligules bluish white or lavender (rarely white). Low
disturbed areas; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Oct–Nov. While
intergrading varieties are sometimes recognized in this species (e.g., Hatch et al. 1990; Kartesz
1994), we have been unable to find clear differences in the available material. We are thus lump-
ing all the nc TX taxa. [A. coerulescens DC., A. praealtus var. coerulescens (DC.) A.G. Jones. A.
praealtus var. texicola Wiegand, A. salicifolius Aiton, Symphyotrichum praealtum (Poir.) G.L.
Nesom]

Aster pratensis Raf., (of the meadows), SILKY ASTER. Rhizomatous perennial similar to A.
sericeus and often treated as a variety of that species; ray flowers with ligules purple to violet
(rarely pinkish or white). Open woods, open areas, usually sandy soils; se and e TX w to East
Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. Sep–Nov. [A. sericeus var. microphyllus DC.,
Symphyotrichumpratense (Raf.) G.L. Nesom] While this taxon is often recognized as a var. of A.
sericeus (e.g., Kartesz 1994; J. Kartesz, pers. comm. 1997), we are following Nesom (1994b) in rec-
ognizing it at the specific level.

Aster sericeus Vent., (silky), SILKY ASTER. Perennial, rhizomatous; stem leaves mostly falling be-
fore flowering; leaves of the head-bearing branchlets persistent, elliptic, not reduced below
heads; ray flowers with ligules purple to violet (rarely pinkish or white). Open areas, rocky cal-
careous soils; Coryell Co. in the Lampasas Cut Plain; also Edwards Plateau. Aug–Oct.
[Symphyotrichumsericeum (Vent.) G.L. Nesom]

Aster subulatus Michx. var. ligulatus Shinners, (sp.: awl-shaped; var.: ligulate, strap-shaped),
WIREWEED, BLACKWEED , SALTMARSH ASTER, SLIM ASTER. Annual, glabrous, much-branched;
leaves linear to subulate, 1–10(–20) cm long, 2–4(–7) mm wide, much reduced up the stem, soon
deciduous except those of the head-bearing branchlets; flowering heads 10–12(–15) mm wide
when ray flowers are fully extended; involucres 3–5(–7) mm high; ligules of ray flowers blue,
purple, violet, pink or white. Weed in lawns, ditches, wet areas; throughout TX. Aug–Nov. [A.
divaricatus (Nutt.) Torr. & A. Gray [nom. illeg.], A. exilis Elliott, Symphyotrichumdivaricatum
(Nutt.) G.L. Nesom] This is the most abundant Aster in the state.

Aster 3eulae Shinners, (for Eula Whitehouse, 1892–1974, of Southern Methodist Univ., TX
collector, artist, and author of Texas Flowers in Natural Color), is cited by Kartesz (1994) as a
hybrid, Aster ? 3eulae Shinners [lanceolatus 3 praealtus]. Most specimens at BRIT annotated as
A. eulae seem very similar to A. praealtus. However, this entire complex of related asters, in-
cluding A. 3eulae, A. lanceolatus, A. lateriflorus, and A. praealtus, is extremely difficult taxo-
nomically. More work is needed to clarify these taxa. Jones et al. (1997) recognized A. eulae as a
distinct species. Guy Nesom (1997 and pers. comm.) indicated that he believes A. eulae is a good
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        321




     Aster lateriflorus [STE]

                                    Aster oblongifolius [GLE ]                       Aster oolentangiensis [STE]




Aster patens var. gracilis [ BB2]




Aster patens var. patens [STE]                            Aster patens var. patentissimus [HEA]
322   ASTERACEAE/ASTRANTHIUM

species and that a study of this taxon is in progress. [Symphyotrichum eulae (Shinners) G.L.
Nesom] Mahler (1988) separated A. praealtus and A. eulae as follows:

1. Stem leaves narrowly elliptical; outer phyllaries half as long as inner ones; involucres ca. 6 mm
   high                                                                                                      A. praealtus
1. Stem leaves elliptic to oblanceolate; outer phyllaries 1/3–1/4 as long as inner ones; involucres 4–
   5 mm high                                                                                                    A. eulae


                                  ASTRANTHIUM WESTERN DAISY
AA genus of 11 species endemic to the s United States and Mexico. (Greek, astron, star, and
anthos, flower) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Larsen 1933; DeJong 1965.

Astranthium integrifolium (Michx.) Nutt. subsp. ciliatum (Raf.) DeJong, (sp.: entire-leaved; subsp.:
ciliate, fringed), WESTERN DAISY, BLUE DAISY. Low pubescent annual from a taproot; stems 10–40
cm tall; leaves alternate, the lowest with narrow, petiolar bases, the upper sessile; blades oblan-
ceolate, entire; heads solitary at the ends of long peduncles, usually several per main stem; ray
flowers 8–35, perfect, fertile, the ligules white to bluish white or pinkish white, not curling, 5–12
mm long; disk flowers perfect, fertile, yellow; disk rounded-conical; pappus absent or a minute
ring or crown. Open woods, prairies, and roadsides, in sandy or silty clay soils; se and e TX w to
Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Mar–May. [A. integrifolium var. ciliatum (Raf.) Larsen, A.
integrifolium var. triflorum (Raf.) Shinners] Barkley (1986) questioned the recognition of subsp.
ciliatum by DeJong (1965).

                                    BACCHARIS GROUNDSELTREE
Shrubs or subshrubs, dioecious, pistillate and staminate plants with rather different appear-
ance; leaves alternate, subulate to obovate, entire, serrate, or dentate, 1- or 3-nerved, glandular or
punctate glandular; inflorescences somewhat paniculate or corymbose; involucres hemi-
spheric to narrowly cylindrical; pistillate heads: ray flowers absent; disk flowers fertile; corollas
filiform, yellowish white to brown; achenes 5–10-ribbed, yellow to reddish; pappus of numer-
ous bristles; staminate heads: ray flowers absent; corollas funnelform, white to yellowish brown;
ovary abortive; pappus of numerous bristles.

AAn American genus of ca. 400 species of dioecious shrubs; some are used medicinally, while
others are cultivated as ornamentals. Pistillate plants are necessary for definitive identification.
9 The leaves and flowers of a number of species contain cardioactive glycosides and are con-
sidered dangerous, even fatal, to livestock (Hardin & Brownie 1993) (Name derived from
Bacchus, god of wine) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Mahler 1955; Mahler & Waterfall 1964.

1. Leaf blades linear, ca. 1–2 mm wide; achenes 5–6-ribbed, 3–4.5 mm long, slightly to prominently
   glandular-scabrous; pistillate pappus of many series, light reddish brown; plants less than 1 m
   tall                                                                                                        B. texana
1. Leaf blades linear to oblanceolate, elliptic, rhomboid or obovate, usually > 2 mm wide (often
   much more); achenes 8–10-ribbed, 1–2 mm long, glabrous; pistillate pappus in 1–2 series, whit-
   ish or dull; plants usually 1–3(–6) m tall (but can flower at 0.5 m tall).
   2. Leaf blades elliptic to rhomboid or obovate, the larger ones 22–37 mm wide, the upper leaves
      gradually reduced, narrower; pistillate involucres 4–6 mm long.                                      B. halimifolia
   2. Leaf blades very narrowly elliptic to linear or oblanceolate, 2–8(–15) mm wide; pistillate in-
      volucres 4–8 mm long.
      3. Pistillate involucres 5 mm or less long; leaves linear to very narrowly elliptic, usually 2–4(–5)
         mm wide; widespread in nc TX                                                                        B. neglecta
                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS          323




        Aster praealtus [GLE]              Aster pratensis [HEA]                         Aster sericeus [STE]




Aster subulatus var. ligulatus [BB2]   Astranthium integrifolium [SM1, STE]             Baccharis halimifolia [GLE ]




                                                                            /
                                             ?




        Baccharis neglecta [BB2]                 Baccharis salicina [RYD]               Baccharis texana [POW]
324    ASTERACEAE/BERLANDIERA

      3. Pistillate involucres 6–8 mm long; leaves oblanceolate, usually 4–8(–15) mm wide; w TX
         possibly e to w margin of nc TX                                                                B. salicina

Baccharis halimifolia L., (with leaves like Halimium of the Cistaceae), EASTERN BACCHARIS, SEA-
MYRTLE , CONSUMPTION - WEED , TREE - GROUNDSEL , GROUNDSELTREE , MANGLIER , SALTBUSH ,
SILVERLING. Shrub 1–6 m tall; leaves alternate; leaf blades punctate, entire in lower half, the up-
per half entire or with few to several teeth, with 1 prominent nerve and 2 lateral nerves, peti-
olate; achenes 1.0–1.7 mm long; pistillate pappus 9–14 mm long. Wet fields, edges of swamps
and marshes, along creeks in woods; Dallas, Fannin, Henderson, and Lamar cos., also Hopkins
Co. (Mahler & Waterfall 1964); mainly se and e TX. Oct–Nov. Salt tolerant. This species is a seri-
ous invasive pest in Tridens Prairie and similar areas in Lamar Co. Potentially toxic to livestock
(Duncan et al. 1957; Burlage 1968). 9

Baccharis neglecta Britton, (neglected, overlooked), ROOSEVELT-WEED, NEW DEAL WEED, JARA
DULCE. Shrub 1–3 m tall; leaves sessile or short petiolate; leaf blades punctate, the upper entire,
the lower entire to serrate, 1-nerved with lateral nerves obscure; achenes ca. 1.2 mm long; pistil-
late pappus 7–12 mm long. Calcareous soils; widely distributed in TX except e TX and Plains
Country. Sep–Nov. This is the common Baccharis in most of nc TX.

Baccharis salicina Torr. & A. Gray, (resembling Salix—willow), SEEP-WILLOW , WATER-WILLOW,
WATER-WALLY, JARA, WILLOW BACCHARIS. Shrub 1–3 m tall; leaves nearly sessile; leaf blades ser-
rate, the wider ones 3-nerved; achenes 1.2–2 mm long; pistillate pappus to 12 mm long. Alluvial,
often sandy or saline soils; included based on citation of vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et
al. (1990); possibly no futher e than Taylor and Wichita cos.; mainly Trans-Pecos and Plains
Country. Sep–Nov.

Baccharis texana (Torr. & A. Gray) A. Gray, (of Texas), PRAIRIE BACCHARIS. Rhizomatous sub-
shrub or shrub 0.25–0.6 m tall; leaves sessile, punctate, essentially linear, minutely undulate,
1-nerved; pistillate involucres 7–10 mm high; pistillate pappus 11–13 mm long. Calcareous soils,
prairies; Bell, Callahan, Jack, Palo Pinto, and Tarrant cos., also Dallas Co., but not collected there
since Bush in 1900 where he stated it was common (Mahler 1988); widespread in TX except e
TX. Jul–Oct.

                                     BERLANDIERA GREENEYES
Pubescent, herbaceous to suffrutescent perennials; leaves alternate, the margins toothed to
lyrate-pinnatifid; heads 1–several in corymbose clusters; ray flowers with ligules yellow to or-
angy with conspicuous green or red to maroon veins on lower surface; disk flowers in ours red-
dish to maroon; pappus absent or inconspicuous.

AA genus of 4 species native to the s United States and Mexico. The disk flowers are sub-
tended by green receptacular bracts giving the disk a green appearance—hence the name com-
mon name GREENEYES. (Named for Jean Louis Berlandier, 1805–1851, French botanist who ex-
plored TX, NM, and Mexico, and one of the first botanists to make extensive collections in TX).
(tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Turner & Johnston 1956; Pinkava 1967; Nesom & Turner 1998.

1. Ligules of ray flowers with veins on lower (= abaxial) surface red to maroon; at least some leaves
   lyrate-pinnatifid; peduncles scabrous to subscabrous; stems arising from a persistent basal ro-
   sette; known in nc TX only from Brown and Callahan cos. on extreme w margin of area                    B. lyrata
1. Ligules of ray flowers with veins on lower surface green; leaves variously toothed, not lyrate-
   pinnatifid; peduncles with spreading or matted hairs; stems not arising from a persistent basal
   rosette; scattered in n and e parts of nc TX.
                                                                                            BIDENS/ASTERACEAE   325

  2. Middle stem leaves usually with evident petioles, the blades ovate; peduncles with matted
     hairs; stems not densely leafy, the internodes often 3 cm or more long; e margin of nc TX          B. pumila
  2. Middle stem leaves sessile or with inconspicuous short petioles, the blades ovate to triangu-
     lar; peduncles with ± spreading hairs; stems very densely leafy, with most internodes 3 cm or
     less long; in nc TX from Dallas Co. n and w                                                  B. betonicifolia

Berlandiera betonicifolia (Hook.) Small, (with leaves like Betonica—betony, now = Stachys in
Lamiaceae), TEXAS GREENEYES. Plant weakly suffrutescent; stems to 1 m tall, producing a new
crop of flowering branches from summit after spring blooming period; leaf blades 4–15 cm
long, 2–6 cm wide; leaves evenly distributed or crowded near summit; leaf blades stiffly hirsute
to subscabrous or loosely hairy but not velvety, the margins toothed; central stem leaves sessile
or short-petioled; ray flowers with ligules 10.5–17 mm long; achenes 4.5–6 mm long, 3–5 mm
wide. Sandy soils, post oak woods, ± open areas; Cooke, Dallas, Montague, and Wise cos.; also a
single collection apparently as an introduced weed in Grayson Co.; also se and c TX and in the
Panhandle. Jun–Sep. [B. texana DC.] We are following Nesom and Turner (1998) for nomencla-
ture of this species. The name B. betonicifolia must be used since the type collection of B.
betonicifolia (named in 1835) is of the same species as B. texana (named in 1836) (Nesom &
Turner 1998). Plants from se TX which had previously gone under the name B. 3betonicifolia
(Hook.) Small are now being recognized as a distinct variety of B. pumila.

Berlandiera lyrata Benth., (lyre-shaped), LYRE-LEAF GREENEYES; BERLANDIER’S DAISY, CHOCOLATE
DAISY, GREEN-EYED LYRE-LEAF. Perennial herb; stems to 1.2 m tall; leaves crowded toward base of
plant; leaf blades velvety; ray flowers with ligules 10–14 mm long, sometimes the entire lower
surface red to maroon; achenes 4.5–6 mm long, 2.7–3.7 mm wide. Dry rocky limestone areas, road-
sides; Callahan Co., also Brown Co. (Stanford 1971); w margin of nc TX s and w to w TX. Nearly
throughout the growing season. The flowers have a chocolate-like aroma (Kirkpatrick 1992).

Berlandiera pumila (Michx.) Nutt., (dwarf), SOFT GREENEYES. Plant herbaceous to suffrutescent;
stems to 0.7 m tall; leaf blades velvety; central stem leaves often with long petioles; ray flowers
with ligules 12–20 mm long; achenes 4.5–6 mm long, 3–4 mm wide. Roadsides, open wooded
areas, often in sandy soils; Henderson Co. near extreme e margin of nc TX, also Hunt, Navarro,
and Williamson cos. (Nesom & Turner 1998); mainly se and e TX. Spring–summer(–fall). [B.
dealbata (Torr. & A. Gray) Small]

        BIDENS BEGGAR-TICKS, BUR-MARIGOLD, TICKSEED-SUNFLOWER
Annual, biennial, or perennial herbs; leaves opposite, simple, divided, or compound; phyllaries
in 2 series, the outer phyllaries herbaceous, the inner series hyaline- or yellow-margined; ray
flowers present or absent, neuter, or pistillate and infertile; corollas in ours yellow or whitish; disk
flowers perfect, fertile, yellow or orange-yellow; pappus of 1–4 usually barbed awns or some-
times reduced or absent; those with retrorse barbs are dispersed by attaching to hair or clothing.

AA genus of ca. 240 species, cosmopolitan, but especially in Mexico; a few are cultivated orna-
mentals while a number are considered weeds. (Latin: bis, twice, and dens, a tooth, in allusion to
the two awns on the achenes of some species) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Sherff 1937; Sherff & Alexander 1955; Hall 1967; Lipscomb & Smith 1977; Mesfin
et al. 1995a, 1995b.

1. Leaves simple, unlobed, serrate or nearly entire; ray flowers large and conspicuous, the ligules
   15–30 mm long (rarely absent)                                                                           B. laevis
1. Leaves incised, lobed, or pinnatifid; ray flowers absent or small and inconspicuous or ligules large,
   10–25 mm long.
326   ASTERACEAE/BIGELOWIA

  2. Ray flowers well-developed, the ligules 10–25 mm long; pappus awns usually absent or re-
     duced to a crown, if present, not retrorsely barbed                                                 B. aristosa
  2. Ray flowers absent or very small, the ligules 2–5 mm long; pappus awns present, retrorsely
     barbed.
     3. Achenes linear, shaped like a fat needle, quadrangular, longer than inner phyllaries, usually
        10–18 mm long; leaves 2–3 times pinnately dissected or compound with numerous seg-
        ments; ray flowers with ligules yellowish white, inconspicuous and not exceeding the disk
        flowers; pappus of (2–)3–4 awns; outer phyllaries 3–7 mm long                                   B. bipinnata
     3. Achenes narrowly wedge-shaped, flattened, equaling or shorter than phyllaries, 5–8(–10)
        mm long; leaves usually once pinnately or ternately divided or compound with 3–5 seg-
        ments; ray flowers absent or present, if present ligules golden yellow, 2–3.5 mm long; pap-
        pus of 2 awns; outer phyllaries often 30–50 mm long                                             B. frondosa

Bidens aristosa (Michx.) Britton, (bearded), BEARDED BEGGAR-TICKS, AWNLESS BEGGAR-TICKS,
TICKSEED-SUNFLOWER. Annual or biennial, 0.3–1(–1.5) m tall; leaves 1–2-pinnate, the segments
linear to lanceolate or narrowly ovate; petioles to 25 mm long; outer phyllaries 12–20, linear, 7–
25 mm long, conspicuously hispid-ciliate; ray flowers ca. 8, golden yellow; achenes flat, 5.5–7.5
mm long, 3–3.5 mm wide; pappus awns absent or slightly developed and with erect-hispid
teeth. Low moist areas; Fannin and Lamar cos. in Red River drainage; mainly se and e TX. Apr–
Oct. [B. polylepis S.F. Blake]

Bidens bipinnata L., (twice-pinnate), SPANISH-NEEDLES. Annual, 0.3–1.5 m tall; stems ± square;
leaves 2–3 times pinnately dissected or compound with numerous segments, the segments del-
toid-lanceolate; petioles 20–50 mm long; outer phyllaries 7–10, linear, 3–7 mm long; inner phyl-
laries 5–9 mm long; achenes linear, quadrangular, usually 10–18 mm long, 0.6–1 mm in diam.;
pappus awns 2–4 mm long. In moist soils; Bell, Dallas, Grayson, and Hopkins cos., also Tarrant
Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau; rare in Trans-Pecos.
Aug–Oct. [B. bipinnata var. biternatoides Sherff] Jones et al. (1997) recognized TX material of
this species as variety biternatoides Sherff.

Bidens frondosa L., (leafy), BEGGAR-TICKS, STICKTIGHTS, DEVIL’S BEGGAR-TICKS. Annual 0.2–1.2 m
tall; leaves once pinnately or ternately divided or compound, the 3–5 segments lanceolate, ser-
rate; petioles 10–60 mm long; outer phyllaries 5–10, linear-spatulate, conspicuously ciliate, of-
ten very long (to 30–50 mm); inner phyllaries shorter, to 5–7 mm long; disk flowers with corol-
las orange-yellow; achenes 1-nerved on each face, flattened, narrowly wedge-shaped, 5–8(–10)
mm long, 2.5–4 mm wide; pappus awns 3–4.5 mm long. Moist areas; se and e TX w to Rolling
Plains and Edwards Plateau. Sep–Oct.

Bidens laevis (L.) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (smooth), SMOOTH BEGGAR ’S -TICKS , WILD
GOLDENGLOW. Annual or perennial, 0.3–1 m tall; leaves sessile, simple, linear to lanceolate or
rarely narrowly ovate, serrate or nearly entire; outer phyllaries 6–8, linear-lanceolate, usually
not longer than the head; ray flowers 7–8 (rarely absent), golden yellow, sometimes red-tinged,
15–30 mm long; achenes wedge-shaped, 6–9 mm long, to ca. 2 mm wide; pappus awns 2–4, 3–5
mm long, retrorsely barbed. In wet areas, ponds, streams; Bell and Dallas cos.; e TX w to nc TX
and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct.

                                                 BIGELOWIA
AA genus of 2 species native to se United States. (Named for Dr. Jacob Bigelow, 1787–1879, Bos-
ton physician who assisted George Engelmann on the U.S.–Mexican boundary mission and col-
lected regularly while visiting his patients in the Boston area on horseback) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Anderson 1970, 1977.
                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     327




Berlandiera betonicifolia [DEL]       Berlandiera lyrata [BB2]                     Berlandiera pumila [SM1]




     Bidens aristosa [BB2]


                                   Bidens bipinnata [REE]                        Bidens frondosa [REE]




       Bidens laevis [MAS ]       Bigelowia nuttallii [HEA]                      Boltonia diffusa [BB2]
328   ASTERACEAE/BOLTONIA

Bigelowia nuttallii L.C. Anderson, (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-American bota-
nist), SLENDER BIGELOWIA, RAYLESS-GOLDENROD. Perennial, rhizomatous, growing in colonies or
clumps; stems rigidly erect, 0.5–1 m tall, unbranched except in head-bearing region; leaves al-
ternate, sessile, linear, entire, often resinous; heads crowded in a corymb-like arrangement; in-
volucres 6–8 mm long, to 2.2 mm wide; phyllaries in several series, imbricate; ray flowers ab-
sent; disk flowers 4–6 per head; corollas ca. 4.5 mm long, yellow, with 5 lobes; achenes with stiff
antrorse hairs; pappus of numerous bristles, ca. 3.8 mm long. Open, sandy or rocky areas; in-
cluded based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), this possibly based
on a Fayette Co. record to the se of nc TX; mainly se and e TX. Aug–Nov. [B. virgata of authors,
not (Nutt.) DC.]

                                                  BOLTONIA
AA genus of ca. 5 species of c and e North America and e Asia; some are cultivated as orna-
mentals. (Named for James Bolton, 1758–99, English botanist) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Fernald 1940b; Morgan 1966.

Boltonia diffusa Elliott, (diffuse, spreading), SMALL-HEAD BOLTONIA, DOLL’S DAISY. Perennial, ± gla-
brous herb 0.2–1(–1.5) m tall; leaves alternate, linear, entire, sessile; inflorescences diffusely
branched; heads small, solitary at ends of branches; involucres 2–4 mm high with phyllaries in
3 series; receptacles 3–6 mm wide, naked; ray flowers 15–20, pistillate, fertile, the corollas 5–8
mm long, white (can be pink upon drying) or lilac; disk flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas 1.5–
2 mm long, yellow; achenes ca. 1.5 mm long; laterally flattened, with 2 wings or in ray achenes
with 3 wings; pappus awns < 1 mm long or absent. Disturbed areas, pond margins, moist sand;
Limestone and Milam cos. near e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e TX. Jul–Oct.

A similar species, B. asteroides (L.) L’Hér., (WHITE BOLTONIA, LARGE-FLOWER DOLL’S DAISY), occurs
in se and e TX just e of nc TX. It differs in having ray corollas usually 8–15 mm long, receptacles
6–10 mm wide, and pappus awns ca. 1 mm long.

      BRICKELLIA (INCLUDING KUHNIA) BRICKELLBUSH, FALSE BONESET
Perennial herbs or shrubs; stems solitary to several; leaves alternate or opposite; leaf blades in
ours resin-dotted and usually reticulate-veined beneath; phyllaries in several series; ray flowers
absent; achenes 10-ribbed, cylindrical; pappus of bristles.

A A New World genus of 100 species native from w United States, Mexico, and Central
America to Argentina; some are cultivated as ornamentals. Several taxa were previously treated
in Kuhnia . (Named for Dr. John Brickell, 1749–1809, of Savanna, GA, amateur botanist and
helpful correspondent of Muhlenberg, Fraser, and others) (tribe Eupatorieae)
REFERENCES: Robinson 1917; Shinners 1946d, 1971; Turner 1989.

1. Pappus bristles scabrous, not feathery, the side branches ca. as long as the width of the central
   bristle axis (use lens); lowest phyllaries lanceolate to ovate, usually only 1–3 times as long as
   wide; heads usually in a ± elongated racemose or paniculate arrangement                              B. cylindracea
1. Pappus bristles feathery (= plumose), with conspicuous (using lens) side branches many times
   longer than the width of the central bristle axis; lowest phyllaries linear to subulate, many times
   as long as wide; heads in ± hemispherical or flat-topped, corymbose groups                        B. eupatorioides

Brickellia cylindracea A. Gray & Engelm., (cylindrical, long and round), GRAVEL -BAR
BRICKELLBUSH. Perennial herb or small shrub from a woody base, to 1.2 m tall; leaves sessile or
with petioles 1–3(–5) mm long; leaf blades lanceolate to ovate, usually coriaceous, the margins
crenate to serrate; inflorescences usually with leafy bracts; involucres usually reddish-tinged,
                                                                                CALYPTOCARPUS/ASTERACEAE          329

the outer phyllaries much shorter than inner; disk corollas yellowish cream; pappus of ca. 30–
35 bristles, usually white or nearly so. Various habitats, but often on rocky limestone soils; Bell
and Somervell (Fossil Rim Wildlife Center) cos.; c part of nc TX s and w to Trans-Pecos. Aug–
Nov. According to Correll and Johnston (1970), this is a very variable species.

Brickellia eupatorioides (L.) Shinners, (resembling Eupatorium—boneset). Herbaceous peren-
nial 0.4–1.3 m tall, from woody taproots; leaf blades lanceolate to broadly rhombic-lanceolate,
the margins entire to serrate; petioles to 1 cm long; disk flowers cream to yellowish cream; pap-
pus of 10–20 brownish to white bristles. This species is quite variable vegetatively. Aug–Nov.
[Kuhnia eupatorioides L.]

1. Middle and outer phyllaries mostly < 3/4 as long as the inner ones, acute or acuminate,
   appressed.
   2. Involucres 8.7–15 mm high; heads with 14–35 flowers; widespread in nc TX                      var. corymbulosa
   2. Involucres 7–11 mm high; heads with 6–15 flowers; e margin of nc TX                          var. eupatorioides
1. Middle and outer phyllaries elongate, at least some of them 3/4 to fully as long as the inner ones,
   with conspicuous sickle-shaped or twisted, filiform tips                                                 var. texana

var. corymbulosa (Torr. & A. Gray) Shinners, (with flowers in small corymbs), PLAINS KUHNIA.
Sandy soils, post oak woodland; Archer, Dallas, Denton, Fannin, Kaufman, Milam, and
Montague cos.; nc TX s to Edwards Plateau and w to Panhandle.

var. eupatorioides. FALSE BONESET. Sandy soils, open oak woods; Henderson, Lamar, and Milam
cos.; mainly e, se and s TX.

var. texana (Shinners) Shinners, (of Texas), PRAIRIE KUHNIA. Limestone soils, prairies; Blackland
and Grand prairies s to Edwards Plateau and w to Panhandle.

                                             CALYPTOCARPUS
AA genus of 3 species native from TX to Guatemala. (Presumably from Greek: calypto, covered,
and carpos, fruit, referring to the “corticate” achene) (tribe Heliantheae)

Calyptocarpus vialis Less., (of the wayside), PROSTRATE LAWNFLOWER, HIERBA DEL CABALLO,
HORSE HERB. Small, trailing, pubescent, perennial herb 5–30 cm tall; leaves opposite, petioled;
leaf blades ovate to ovate-lanceolate or deltoid, 1–3(–4) cm long, toothed; heads short-pe-
duncled, solitary in leaf axils, small; ray flowers 3–8, the corollas 1–4 mm long; phyllaries 4–5,
subequal in length, obtuse, overlapping laterally; ray and disk corollas yellow or yellow-orange;
pappus of 2 awns and sometimes also 1–3 rudimentary awns. Lawn weed; Bell, Brown, Dallas,
and Grayson cos., also Hood, Somervell, and Tarrant cos. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); e 1/2 of TX,
more common to the s. Apr–Jul. This sometimes troublesome lawn weed is occasionally pur-
posely planted in shady situations to provide ground cover.

                           CARDUUS THISTLE, PLUMELESS-THISTLE
Ours annual or biennial herbs; leaves alternate, pinnatifid with prickly margins, decurrent as
spiny wings along stem; phyllaries many, imbricated, the tips prickly; ray flowers absent; disk
corollas pink to deep pink (rarely purple); pappus of numerous hair-like bristles, these not plu-
mose, sometimes barbellate with short projections to ± as long as width of bristle axis, the
bristles joined basally and deciduous as a ring.

AA genus of 91 species native to Eurasia, the Mediterranean, and e Africa mountains. Accord-
ing to some authors (Correll & Johnston 1970), Carduus should probably be enlarged to include
Cirsium which is similar except for the pappus. (The ancient Latin name) (tribe Cardueae)
REFERENCES: Desrochers et al. 1988; McGregor 1985b.
330   ASTERACEAE/CARTHAMUS

1. Heads usually ± solitary at the ends of branches, 30–50(–70) mm in diam.; some outer phyllaries
   spreading or reflexed                                                                                   C. nutans
1. Heads usually in close clusters of 3–10 at the ends of branches, 5–15(–20) mm in diam.; phyllaries
   usually ascending                                                                                  C. tenuiflorus

Carduus nutans L. subsp. macrocephalus (Desf.) Nyman, (sp.: nodding; subsp.: large-headed),
MUSK-THISTLE, NODDING-THISTLE . Extremely prickly, stout winter annual or biennial 0.3–2(–3)
m tall; larger leaves 15–40 cm long; leaves ± glabrous or with long hairs mainly along the veins
below, deeply lobed, coarsely spiny-toothed, sessile, decurrent as spiny wings 0.5–2 cm wide;
heads nodding, large; flowers numerous; corollas slender, to 3 cm long; achenes 3–5 mm long;
pappus to 20 mm long. Roadsides, weedy areas; a noxious weed now spreading in nc TX; Collin
and Grayson cos.; also Edwards Plateau. Jun–Sep. Native of Mediterranean region. [C. macro-
cephalus Desf.] This species was apparently first collected in TX in Sutton Co. on the Edwards
Plateau in 1939; it was supposedly introduced through a shipment of hay from California (Cory
1940). McGregor (1986) questioned the validity of distinguishing subspecies. McGregor (1985b)
indicated that this species is an official noxious weed in KS; he gave a detailed account of its
invasion. I

Carduus tenuiflorus Curtis, (slender-flowered), SLENDER BRISTLE-THISTLE. Prickly annual or bi-
ennial 0.3–1 m tall; stems with wings to 1 cm wide; corollas 10–14 mm long; achenes 4–5 mm
long; pappus 11–13 mm long. Roadsides, fields, weedy areas; Parker Co., also Bell, Brown,
Comanche, Coryell, Hamilton, Mills (J. Stanford, pers. comm.), Somervell, and Tarrant (R.
O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; also Edwards Plateau. Apr–May. Native of s Europe. Unknown in nc
TX until ca. 1990; this species has the potential of becoming a problematic pernicious weed
much like C. nutans. I

                                      CARTHAMUS SAFFLOWER
Annual herbs; leaves usually alternate, spiny, somewhat clasping, sessile; heads terminal, soli-
tary or corymbose; at least inner phyllaries spiny or spine-tipped, outer phyllaries spreading,
conspicuously leafy; receptacle scaly; ray flowers absent; disk flowers tubular, in ours yellow to
orange (rarely whitish); pappus of scales or absent.

AA genus of 17 species native from the Mediterranean area to c Asia. (From Arabic or Hebrew:
quarthami , to paint, alluding to the dye obtained from the flowers of C. tinctorius) (tribe
Cardueae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1958; Kessler 1987.

1. Leaves ± pinnatifid, coarsely and conspicuously spine-toothed; filaments bearded; achenes (at
   least outer) rugose; pappus present on inner achenes                                                   C. lanatus
1. Leaves usually simple (rarely pinnatifid), entire or inconspicuously spine-toothed; filaments gla-
   brous; achenes ± smooth; pappus usually absent (rarely present)                                      C. tinctorius

Carthamus lanatus L., (woolly), DISTAFF-THISTLE, SAFFRON-THISTLE. Plant glandular, and some-
times with woolly, spider-web-like pubescence; stems 0.4–1.2 m tall; leaves alternate; corollas
yellow with red veins (rarely whitish); achenes straw-colored, 5–6 mm long; pappus of ± rigid,
flat, bristle-like, ciliate scales to 1 cm long as well as some outer short scales. Disturbed road-
sides; Coryell Co. (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997); nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Jun. Native of Medi-
terranean region. Kessler (1987), who documented its first occurrence in OK, indicated it is a
potentially serious pest plant. I

Carthamus tinctorius L., (belonging to the dyers, of dyes), SAFFLOWER, FALSE SAFFRON, BASTARD
SAFFRON. Plant a ± glabrous taprooted herb; stems 0.3–1 m tall; leaves alternate to subopposite
above, elliptic to ovate or oblong; heads in a cymose arrangement; corollas bright orange to yel-
                                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             331




Brickellia cylindracea [MGH]                Brickellia eupatorioides var. corymbulosa [BB2]




                                                                                        Carduus nutans subsp. macrocephalus [MIT ]



             Brickellia eupatorioides var. eupatorioides [GLE]




                        Calyptocarpus vialis [HEA, SM1]                                               Carduus tenuiflorus [SMI]
332   ASTERACEAE/CENTAUREA

low-orange; achenes glabrous, ivory white, ca. 6 mm long and 4 mm wide; pappus usually absent
(rarely with rudimentary or well-developed bristle-like scales). Yard weed, possibly from seeds
in bird feeder; collected in 1996 in Tarrant Co. (Fort Worth; Sylvester s.n.); this is apparently the
first report from TX. Summer. Native of Old World, possibly from the Near East. Cultivated
since ancient times as a dye plant (orange from the flowers used in dyeing food and for rouge)
and now for its edible oil (from the seeds); seeds were found in the tomb of Tutankhamun and
mummy wrappings were sometimes dyed with this plant (Hepper 1990). I

             CENTAUREA BASKET-FLOWER, STAR-THISTLE, KNAPWEED
Annuals (rarely biennials); leaves alternate, simple, entire, toothed or pinnatifid, not prickly;
heads solitary or corymbose-paniculate; ray flowers absent; outer disk corollas enlarged, simu-
lating rays; corollas deeply (4–)5-lobed, the lobes linear; anthers with elongated appendages;
achenes obliquely attached; pappus of bristles.

AA large genus (ca. 500 species) of herbs and subshrubs native to the Mediterranean, Turkey,
the Near East, n Eurasia, tropical Africa, Australia, and North America; some are cultivated as
ornamentals. 9 Centaurea maculosa Lam. (SPOTTED KNAPWEED), a European native now natu-
ralized and invasive in parts of the U.S., is suspected of being carcinogenic; a field worker in
Idaho developed tumors in his fingers after pulling plants of this species and apparently get-
ting sap in breaks in his skin (Jerry Niefoff, pers. comm.); as a precaution, gloves should be worn
when handling Centaurea species; some species are known to cause toxic effects in horses
(Kingsbury 1964; James & Welsh 1992). The stamens of many Centaurea species are touch-sen-
sitive; when touched by visiting insects, they contract suddenly resulting in pollen being forced
out the tube formed from the fusion of the anthers (Wills & Irwin 1961). (Greek: kentaur, cen-
taur; the centaur Chiron in Greek mythology was said to know the medicinal value of plants)
(tribe Cardueae)
REFERENCE: Moore 1972.

1. Heads large, the involucres of well-developed heads 3–6+ cm wide; pappus bristles (5–)6–14
   mm long, barbed; phyllaries without a sharp spine at tip (but margins pectinately dissected);
   native species                                                                                        C. americana
1. Heads small, the involucres 2.5 cm or less wide; pappus bristles 2–6 mm long, barbless; phyllaries
   without OR with a sharp spine at tip; introduced species.
   2. Corollas blue, purple, pink, or white; involucres of well-developed heads 1.5–2.5 cm wide; phyl-
      laries without a sharp spine at tip (margins with teeth or narrow lobes)                              C. cyanus
   2. Corollas yellow; involucres ca. 1 cm wide (not including spines); phyllaries with a conspicuous
      sharp spine at tip.
      3. Spiny tip of phyllaries 3–9 mm long, often darker than phyllary body                            C. melitensis
      3. Spiny tip of phyllaries 10–17 mm long, straw-colored, usually lighter than phyllary body        C. solstitialis

Centaurea americana Nutt., (of America), BASKET -FLOWER, AMERICAN BASKET- FLOWER,
POWDERPUFF THISTLE, THORNLESS-THISTLE, CARDO DEL VALLE, AMERICAN KNAPWEED, STAR-THISTLE.
Annual; stems 0.3–2 m tall; leaves sessile, ± entire, glabrous or sparsely scabrous and gland-dot-
ted; heads solitary at the ends of branches, large, (3–)4–8(–10) cm across including the corollas,
quite showy, 1–few per plant; phyllaries appressed, imbricate, of 2 distinct parts, the lower part
light green, entire, the upper part straw-colored and pectinately dissected into narrow lobes;
corollas pink to occasionally deep purple-red (rarely white); marginal corollas larger, to 5 cm
long; central corollas to 3.2 cm long. Disturbed areas; widespread in TX. May–Jul. Sometimes
cultivated. The basket-like appearance of the overlapping dissected phyllaries gives this species
its common name. The stamens are reported to be sensitive to touch; when touched by insects
they suddenly contract and push pollen out onto the pollinator (Kirkpatrick 1992). m/82
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   333




                                                                            Carthamus tinctorius [EN2]




                                         Carthamus lanatus [HEA]




Centaurea americana [GLE, STE]




                             Centaurea cyanus [GAR, M&F]                  Centaurea melitensis [M&F]
334   ASTERACEAE/CHAETOPAPPA

Centaurea cyanus L., (blue), BACHELOR-BUTTON, CORNFLOWER, BLUEBOTTLE. Annual; stems 0.2–1
m tall; basal and lower leaves oblanceolate, pinnately lobed or toothed; upper stem leaves nar-
rowly oblanceolate, entire to toothed, white woolly below, decurrent; phyllaries with numerous
small teeth, the margins often darker; marginal corollas enlarged; pappus 0.2–3.5 mm long. Cul-
tivated, naturalized in disturbed areas, roadsides; Clay, Dallas, Grayson, and Kaufman cos.; also
Rolling Plains, Edwards Plateau, and Post Oak Savannah. Apr–Jun. Native of Mediterranean
region. I

Centaurea melitensis L., (of Malta), STAR-THISTLE, MALTA CENTAUREA, MALTA STAR-THISTLE,
TOCALOTE. Annual or rarely biennial; stems 0.1–0.8 m tall; basal and lower leaves pinnately
lobed, the lobes rounded; upper stem leaves linear, decurrent; pappus 2–6 mm long. Disturbed
calcareous soils; Lampasas Co., also Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); widespread
in TX but especially on Edwards Plateau. Native of Europe. Cory (1940) reported that this spe-
cies was first collected in TX in Bexar Co. in 1934. I

Centaurea solstitialis L., (the summer solstice), YELLOW STAR-THISTLE, BARNABY’S STAR-THISTLE.
Annual; stems 0.3–0.7 m tall; basal leaves pinnatifid; upper stem leaves linear, decurrent; pap-
pus 2–4 mm long. Disturbed areas, roadsides; Dallas (Flyr, 1962) and Tarrant cos.; also Edwards
Plateau. Jul–Oct. Native of Eurasia. Reportedly causes brain lesions and a nervous syndrome,
“chewing disease,” in horses; the toxic principle is not known (Kingsbury 1964). First noted in
Tarrant Co. in 1993 and now rapidly spreading on levees along the Trinity River and along
highway embankments; it has the potential of becoming a problematic weed. 9 I

                                   CHAETOPAPPA LEAST DAISY
Small annuals or perennials; leaves alternate; heads solitary at the ends of the upper branches;
ray flowers pistillate and fertile, usually white; disk flowers perfect and fertile, yellow; achenes
5-nerved.

AA genus of 10 species endemic to sw North America; including the previously recognized
monotypic genus Leucelene. (Greek: chaite, a bristle, and pappos, down, fuzz, pappus) (tribe
Astereae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1946a, 1946b; Van Horn 1973; Nesom 1988.

1. Plants taprooted annuals; leaves usually neither crowded nor conspicously overlapping; ray flowers
   5–13; pappus of 5 short scales alternating with as many awns 1–3 mm long or the awns absent;
   involucres 2–3 mm wide                                                                             C. asteroides
1. Plants perennials from creeping subligneous roots; leaves crowded and conspicuously overlap-
   ping; ray flowers 12–24; pappus of 20–30 capillary bristles 4.5–5.5 mm long; involucres 5–10 mm
   wide                                                                                                C. ericoides

Chaetopappa asteroides Nutt. ex DC., (resembling Aster), COMMON LEAST DAISY. Plant very
small, 5–15(–25) cm tall; stem pubescence appressed to spreading; basal rosette leaves narrowly
obovate to orbicular; stem leaves narrower than basal, usually 5–10 mm long; floral bracts lin-
ear to subulate; involucres 3.5–4.5 mm high, cylindrical; phyllaries imbricated; ray flowers with
ligules 2–4 mm long, white, turning bluish, violet, or pinkish, curling under at night or in age;
disk flowers yellow; achenes 1.6–2 mm long, pubescent. Sandy open areas; se and e TX w to
Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun, sporadically later.

Chaetopappa ericoides (Torr.) G.L. Nesom, (resembling Erica —heath), BABY WHITE ASTER, WHITE
ASTER, ROSE-HEATH. Plant very small, 10–15(–20) cm tall, tufted, forming patches from creeping
roots; leaves crowded, alternate, narrowly oblanceolate, 2–12(–15) mm long, 2 mm or less wide,
entire; heads terminating the numerous erect branches; involucres 5–7 mm high; ray flowers
with ligules 2–3 mm long, white or withering rosy, rather showy, curling under at night or in
                                                                        CHAPTALIA /ASTERACEAE   335

age; disk flowers yellow; achenes 2–3 mm long. Sandy or gravelly prairies or rock outcrops; Palo
Pinto Co.; Panhandle to Trans-Pecos e locally to West Cross Timbers. Apr–Sep. [Aster arenosus
(A. Heller) S.F. Blake, Leucelene ericoides (Torr.) Greene]

                                CHAPTALIA SUNBONNETS
AA genus of ca. 60 species of warm areas of the Americas. (Named for J.A.C. Chaptal, 1756–1831,
agricultural chemist, who invented the wine-making process of chaptalization, which makes the
wine more alcoholic by adding sugar at the same time as squeezing the grape) (tribe Mutisieae)
REFERENCES: Vuilleumier 1969b; Simpson 1978; Nesom 1995.

Chaptalia texana Greene, (of Texas), SILVERPUFF. Acaulescent perennial herb; leaves in a rosette,
6–15 cm long, 2.4–4 cm wide, oblanceolate- or obovate-lyrate, narrowed to a subpetiolar base;
lower surface of leaf blades conspicuously whitish tomentose, in striking contrast to green up-
per surface; peduncles 10–60 cm long, naked or with 1–2 minute bracts; heads solitary, with ca.
150 flowers, nodding in flower, erect in fruit; phyllaries whitish tomentose except often gla-
brous and darker (sometimes purplish) at apex; peripheral flowers pistillate, ray-like, the upper
lip absent, creamy, maturing to crimson, 0.2–0.8 mm wide; inner pistillate flowers with filiform
corollas; central flowers perfect; achenes 0.7 mm thick, 9–16 mm long, 2/3 of which is the fili-
form beak; pappus conspicuous, of numerous buffy-white, hair-like bristles ca. 13–14 mm long.
Calcareous areas; Burnet Co. (C. Sexton, pers. comm.); also citation of vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2)
by Hatch et al. (1990); also Travis Co. just s of nc TX; se TX w through Edwards Plateau to Trans-
Pecos; endemic to TX. Sep–Nov. [C. nutans (L.) Polák. var. texana (Greene) Burkart] E

              CHLORACANTHA MEXICAN DEVILWEED, SPINY-ASTER
AThe genus is composed of a single species occuring from the sw U.S. to Central America
(Nesom et al. 1991). It is distinctive, but of uncertain phylogeny, and has been placed in a variety
of genera including Aster, Erigeron, and Leucosyris; based on DNA evidence, C. spinosa seems
more closely related to Boltonia and Heterotheca than to either Aster or Erigeron; it is thus rec-
ognized in its own genus (Nesom et al. 1991). (Greek: chloro, green, and acanthos, spine or thorn,
in reference to the evergreen thorny stems) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Nesom et al. 1991; Sundberg 1991; Nesom 1994b.

Chloracantha spinosa (Benth.) G.L. Nesom, (spiny), MEXICAN DEVILWEED , SPINY-ASTER,
DEVILWEED-ASTER. Coarse, nearly leafless rhizomatous perennial, the plant superficially rush-
like in appearance, sometimes in dense clumps; stems glabrous or glabrate, green and glaucous,
photosynthetic, strictly erect, 0.5–1.5(–2.5) m tall, freely branched, alive for up to ca. 4 growing
seasons; branchlets sometimes modified into thorns 10–20 mm long; usually ± leafless or leaves
early deciduous or with a few small or minute subulate leaves; heads numerous; involucres 3.5–
7.5 mm high; ray flowers ca. 10–33; ligules to ca. 5.5 mm long, white, sometimes bluish-tinged.
Low disturbed or weedy areas, roadsides; Milam and Limestone cos. on e margin of nc TX w to
West Cross Timbers; widespread in TX but more common in s and w parts of the state. Jun–Oct.
[Aster spinosusBenth., Leucosyris spinosa (Benth.) Greene]

                              CHRYSOPSIS GOLDEN-ASTER
Taprooted annual herbs; leaves alternate; ray flowers pistillate, fertile, yellow; disk flowers yel-
low; pappus of bristles and sometimes small scales.

AA genus of 10 species native from the se United States (especially Florida) to Mexico and the
Bahamas; including the previously recognized monotypic genus Bradburia . Chrysopsis has
sometimes been treated in Heterotheca. Generic boundaries for the GOLDEN-ASTERS has long
been problematic. Semple (1977, 1981) and Nesom (1991a, 1991b) gave convincing justification
336   ASTERACEAE/CICHORIUM

for the delineation followed here; more recently Semple (1996) transferred C. pilosa to
Bradburia , making it a genus of 2 species of annuals; he indicated (pers. comm.) that while “…
the two genera are most likely more closely related than any of the other GOLDEN-ASTER genera,
it remains to be seen whether the (x = 3,4) pilosa-hirtella lineage is derived from within the
Chrysopsislineage (x = 4,5) or whether the two share an immediate common ancestor (x = 5).”
Until these relationships are clarified, we are following Nesom (1991a, 1997b) and J. Kartesz
(pers. comm. 1997) in treating the 2 nc TX species in Chrysopsis. (Greek: chrysos, gold, and opsis,
aspect, from the golden inflorescences) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1951b; Harms 1968, 1974; Semple 1977, 1981, 1996; Semple et al. 1980;
Semple & Chinnappa 1984; Nesom 1991a, 1991b, 1997b.

1. Phyllaries with conspicuous pilose pubescence and sometimes glandular; ray flowers with an
   inner pappus of bristles and an outer pappus of small scales; disk flowers fertile, with a pappus of
   numerous bristles, similar to pappus of the ray flowers; widespread in nc TX                           C. pilosa
1. Phyllaries glabrous or nearly so; ray flowers with a pappus of bristles, without an outer pappus of
   small scales; disk flowers infertile, with a pappus of 1–2 slender bristles or awns, very different
   from pappus of the ray flowers; possibly present on s margin of nc TX                                  C. texana

Chrysopsis pilosa Nutt., (pilose, with long soft hairs), SOFT GOLDEN-ASTER. Plant with pubes-
cence of sparse to dense soft pilose hairs and short glandular hairs; stems 15–90(–160) cm tall;
leaves entire or the larger coarsely toothed or shallowly lobed, the lowermost sessile or short
petiolate; heads pedunculate, terminating the branches, the central one often overtopped by
the laterals; ray flowers ca. 13–21, the ligule to ca. 10 mm long, remaining straight, becoming
erect at night; disk flowers perfect, fertile. Sandy woods, old fields, and roadsides; se and e TX w
to East Cross Timbers, also Montague Co. May–Oct. n = 4. [Bradburia pilosa (Nutt.) Semple,
Heterotheca pilosa (Nutt.) Shinners]

Chrysopsis texana G.L. Nesom, (of Texas), MAUCHIA. Plant pilose-hispid; stems 10–70 cm tall;
basal leaves toothed or short lobed, usually withered before flowering; stem leaves sessile, linear
to narrowly oblanceolate, entire; heads pedunculate, solitary at ends of branches; disk flowers
perfect but infertile. Open, disturbed areas, usually on sand or gravel; included based on citation
of vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); se and s TX n to at least Travis Co. just s of nc
TX (Semple & Chinnappa 1984); endemic to TX (waifs present in Louisiana). Sometimes recog-
nized in the genus Bradburia [as B. hirtella Torr. & A. Gray]. [not C. hirtella DC.] E

                                          CICHORIUM CHICORY
AA genus of 7 species native to Europe, the Mediterranean, and Ethiopia. The Old World C.
endivia L., ENDIVE, has long been cultivated for its edible leaves. (Name of disputed origin; ac-
cording to Pliny from Egyptian and to Forsskål from Arabic; according to Theophrastes and
Dioscorides from Greek: kichorion, of the fields (Vuilleumier 1973)) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCE: Vuilleumier 1973.

Cichorium intybus L., (old generic name, from Latin for endive or succory), COMMON CHICORY,
BLUE-SAILORS, SUCCORY, WITLOOF, RAGGED-SAILORS. Glabrous perennial herb with deep taproot;
sap milky; stems 0.3–1(–1.7) m tall; basal leaves toothed or pinnately lobed, oblong-lanceolate;
stem leaves alternate, much reduced; heads sessile and axillary, or terminating naked
branchlets, the interrupted inflorescences raceme-like; phyllaries in 2 series, the outer much
shorter, all with hardened, whitish bases and loose, green tips; flowers all ligulate; corollas lav-
ender-blue, rarely white or pink, open during the morning, later on cloudy days; ligules 15–25
mm long; achenes 2–3 mm long; pappus a minute crown of scales ca. 0.2 mm long. A cool-cli-
mate species, rare in TX; roadsides; Grayson and Rockwall cos.; a few scattered records else-
where in the Panhandle, Trans-Pecos, and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct. Native of Eurasia. The
                                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS    337




                   Centaurea solstitialis [ M&F, REE]                                         Chaetopappa asteroides [GLE]




Chaetopappa ericoides [BB2]                                                                   Chloracantha spinosa [ABR]




                                                        Chaptalia texana [PHY]




    Chrysopsis pilosa [GLE]                                                                     Chrysopsis texana [SYS]
338   ASTERACEAE/CIRSIUM

roots, when ground and roasted, are the chicory often mixed with coffee; the blanched leaves
are reported to be edible (Mabberley 1987). I

                   CIRSIUM THISTLE, PLUMED THISTLE, TRUE THISTLE
Erect biennial or perennial herbs; leaves alternate, prickly-toothed or -lobed, glabrate to often
strikingly white or gray tomentose on one or both sides; phyllaries many, imbricated, the outer
successively shorter, the tips prickly; ray flowers absent; disk flowers perfect; corollas purplish,
lavender, white, or rarely yellow, long tubular, the lobes linear; pappus of numerous plumose
bristles united at base and deciduous as a unit.

AA n temperate genus of ca. 250 species; some are problematic weeds; similar to Carduus ex-
cept for the pappus. (Greek cirsium, thistle, from cirsos, a swollen vein, for which thistle was a
reputed remedy) (tribe Cardueae)
REFERENCES: Howell 1959; Moore & Frankton 1969; O’Kennon & Nesom 1988.

1. Upper surface of leaf blades with numerous short, yellowish, appressed prickles; leaf blades de-
   current along stem; rare introduced species                                                                  C. vulgare
                                                                                                                         e
1. Upper surface of leaf blades glabrous to variously pubescent but without prickles; leaf blades
   decurrent along stem OR not so; common native species.
   2. Involucres subtended by a false involucre (= whorl of spiny-pinnatifid, leafy bracts equaling or
      exceeding the phyllaries present just below the phyllaries); leaves green, glabrous or thinly
      pubescent beneath                                                                                    C. horridulum
   2. Involucres without basal whorl of spiny leafy bracts (= false involucre) just below the phyllaries,
      the heads thus ± naked at base or with a few linear or narrow bracts shorter than the phyllaries;
      leaves gray or white with woolly pubescence (= tomentose), at least beneath.
      3. Involucres 2.5–4.5 cm high, oblong or urceolate-oblong, higher than broad in flower (broader
         in age).
         4. Upper stem leaves with broad, clasping or decurrent bases; perennial from creeping
            rootstocks; upper leaf surface woolly-pubescent, gray.
            5. Leaf blades mostly shallowly pinnatifid, not decurrent or decurrent for 1 cm or less;
               prickle tips of middle and outer phyllaries 1–5 mm long; widespread in nc TX                C. undulatum
            5. Leaf blades uniformly deeply pinnatifid, middle and upper decurrent as wings on stem
               for > 1 cm; prickle tips of middle and outer phyllaries (5–)7–15 mm long; on extreme w
               edge of nc TX                                                                           C. ochrocentrum
         4. Upper stem leaves narrowed at base and short-petioled; winter annual or biennial, with
            out creeping rootstocks; upper leaf surface dark green, often nearly glabrous.
            6. Stem leaves entire to shallowly pinnatifid (divided half way to midrib or less); roots
               coarsely fibrous, not tuberous; flowering mainly mid-Jun–Sep                                 C. altissimum
            6. Stem leaves (except uppermost) deeply pinnatifid, divided 1/4–3/4 to midrib; usually
               some roots with tuberous enlargement; flowering May–Jul                                    C. engelmannii
      3. Involucres 1.4–2.2 cm high, nearly as broad as high or broader in flower, much broader in
         age                                                                                                   C. texanum

Cirsium altissimum (L.) Hill, (very tall), IOWA THISTLE, TALL THISTLE, ROADSIDE THISTLE. Winter
annual, biennial, or perennial 0.5–1.5+ m tall; leaf blades varying from unlobed to deeply lobed
(on lower leaves), strikingly white-tomentose beneath, glabrescent above; corollas lavender, to
32 mm long; pappus bristles to 25 mm long. Open stream bottom thickets and pastures, often
calcareous soils; Post Oak Savannah w to Tarrant and Wise cos. Jun–Sep. [Cirsium iowense
sensu Mahler, not (Pammel) Fernald]

Cirsium engelmannii Rydb., (for George Engelmann, 1809–1884, German-born botanist and
physician of St. Louis), BLACKLAND THISTLE. Biennial or weak perennial 0.5–1(–1.5) m tall; leaf
                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   339




Cichorium intybus [REE]




                                                        Cirsium engelmannii [HEA]
      Cirsium altissimum [BB2]




                             Cirsium horridulum [BT3]                     Cirsium ochrocentrum [BB2]
340   ASTERACEAE/CONYZA

blades nearly all deeply lobed, strikingly white-tomentose beneath, green and moderately
hairy to often glabrescent above; corollas deep rosy lavender, to 36 mm long; pappus bristles to
25 mm long. Prairies, in calcareous clay, rarely sandy soils; Blackland Prairie w to Grand Prairie
and s to Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX and adjacent LA and OK. May–Jul. [Cirsium terrae-
nigrae Shinners]

Cirsium horridulum Michx., (prickly, horribly armed), BULL THISTLE, YELLOW THISTLE, HORRID
THISTLE. Coarse, thinly pubescent or glabrous, winter annual or biennial, beginning to flower when
as low as 25 cm, becoming as much as 2 m tall; leaf blades green on both surfaces; flowering stems
usually with a solitary terminal head, rarely branched above; involucres wider than long, 4–8 cm
wide, immediately subtended by a conspicuous false involucre of ca. 10–12 spiny bracts; corollas
rosy lavender, rarely yellow (in se TX). Damp open woods, low areas; Fannin Co. (Talbot prop-
erty) in Red River drainage, also Denton Co. (G. Diggs, pers. obs.); mainly se and e TX. Mar–May.
Jones et al. (1997) recognized TX material of this species as var. elliottii Torr. & A. Gray. m/84

Cirsium ochrocentrum A. Gray, (yellow-centered), YELLOW-SPINE THISTLE. Biennial or perennial
0.2–1(–1.5) m tall, extremely spiny; leaf blades strikingly white-tomentose beneath, with some
tomentum above, the upper surface grayish, often much darker in appearance than lower; co-
rollas rosy lavender or purplish, rarely white. Sandy or rocky prairies and roadsides; Clay and
Callahan cos. at w edge of nc TX, s and w to w TX. May–Oct.

Cirsium texanum Buckley, (of Texas), TEXAS THISTLE, SOUTHERN THISTLE. Biennial or perennial
0.5–2 m tall, with deep taproot; leaf blades green and glabrous or thinly tomentose above,
thinly grayish or whitish tomentose beneath; upper leaves reduced, sessile, slightly clasping;
branches long, erect or ascending; involucres small (1.4–2.2 cm high) in comparison with other
nc TX species; corollas pink to deep rosy lavender. Prairies and roadsides; nearly throughout the
state except extreme e TX. May–Jun. Goldfinches are reported to use the plumose pappus
bristles to line their nests (Ajilvsgi 1984). m/84

Cirsium undulatum (Nutt.) Spreng., (undulated, wavy), WAVY-LEAF THISTLE, PASTURE THISTLE.
Rhizomatous low perennial 0.2–1(–2) m tall; leaf blades sometimes nearly as white-tomentose
above as below, sometimes undulate; corollas purplish, lavender or white. Prairies, pastures, and
roadsides; Blackland Prairie s and w to w TX. May–Jul. m/84

Cirsium vulgare (Savi) Ten., (common), BULL THISTLE. Biennial; stems 0.5–2 m tall; leaf blades
green above, green or with grayish pubescence below; involucres 2–3 cm high; corollas dark
purple, 27–35 mm long. Roadsides, pastures, waste areas; Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.);
also n Red River Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); also Edwards Plateau; first collected in TX in
Gillespie Co. in 1987 (O’Kennon & Nesom 1988). Jul–Sep. Native of Eurasia. I

                                                 CONYZA
Annual herbs; stems glabrous to pubescent; leaves alternate, entire or toothed; phyllaries in 4
series, imbricate, the inner ones larger; ray flowers pistillate, fertile; corollas whitish, cream or
pinkish, the ligules inconspicuous, shorter than the tubes and scarcely if at all surpassing the
pappus, the tubes filiform; disk flowers perfect, fertile; corollas cream-colored to yellowish or
pinkish; achenes 2-ribbed, ± hirsute; pappus of hair-like bristles.

AA genus of ca. 60 species of temperate and warm areas; similar to Erigeron and previously
lumped with that genus by some authorities; not sharply distinct. (From Greek name for saf-
flower) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Cronquist 1943; Shinners 1949e; Nesom 1978, 1990b.
1. Plants unbranched or branching well above base, erect, (30–)100–200+ cm tall; larger leaves 4–13
   cm long, > 2 mm wide; stems glabrous or with widely spreading hairs                              C. canadensis
                                                                                         COREOPSIS/ASTERACEAE         341

1. Plants branching from near base, not obviously erect, low, 10–30(–40) cm tall; larger leaves
   1–2(–4) cm long, 2 mm or less wide; stem pubescence appressed                                C. ramosissima

Conyza canadensis (L.) Cronquist, (of Canada), HORSEWEED. Leaves many, subsessile, narrowly
lanceolate or oblanceolate, to 14 mm wide, entire or toothed; heads many, small, in a narrow ter-
minal panicle-like inflorescence; involucres 3–4 mm high; ray flowers numerous (20–40). Erod-
ing or disturbed ground; various soils. May–Oct.

1. Stems with widely spreading hairs                                                                     var. canadensis
1. Stems glabrous                                                                                            var. glabrata

var. canadensis. HORSE-TAIL CONYZA, CANADA FLEABANE. Leaf blades prominently pilose on
margins. Clay, Comanche, and Dallas cos., also Tarrant and Somervell cos. (R. O’Kennon, pers.
obs.); nc TX and Plains Country. [Erigeron canadensis L.]

var. glabrata (A. Gray) Cronquist, (somewhat smooth or hairless, becoming hairless). Leaf blades
pilose or nearly glabrous on margins. Common and widespread in nc TX; throughout TX. [Eri-
geron canadensis var. glabratus A. Gray]

Conyza ramosissima Cronquist, (much-branched), LOW FLEABANE, LOW CONYZA, SPREADING
FLEABANE . Stem hairs antrorsely appressed; leaves linear, entire; heads numerous, similar to
those of C. canadensis; involucres 3–4(–5) mm high. Clay soils, disturbed habitats. lawns; Collin,
Dallas, Erath, Grayson, and Tarrant cos.; nc TX and Plains Country. Jun–Oct. [Erigeron
divaricatus Michx.]

                    COREOPSIS GOLDEN-WAVE, TICKSEED, COREOPSIS
Herbaceous annuals or perennials, glabrous or minutely pubescent; leaves usually opposite,
simple or pinnately compound; heads pedunculate, solitary or corymbose; inner phyllaries
united at base into a cup with outer phyllaries distinct and different in appearance; ray flowers
ca. 8, sterile, the ligules yellow, sometimes with a reddish brown basal spot; disk flowers yellow
or reddish brown; achenes flattened, winged or wingless; pappus of 2 awns, sometimes obso-
lete.

AAn American genus of 50 species; some are cultivated as ornamentals; closely related to
Bidens. (Greek: coris, a bug, and opsis, appearance, from the form of the achene) (tribe
Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Sherff 1936; Sherff & Alexander 1955; Smith & Parker 1971; Smith 1974, 1976;
Crawford & Smith 1982, 1984; Jansen et al. 1987; Crawford et al. 1992; Mesfin et al. 1995a, 1995b.

1. Disk corollas reddish brown (at least apically); ray flowers with ligules yellow but typically with a
   reddish brown spot at base.
   2. Outer phyllaries equal to or longer than the inner, ca. 4–11 mm long, linear; disk corollas apically
      5-lobed; anthers 5; ray flowers with ligules 4–5-toothed                                                  C. wrightii
   2. Outer phyllaries very small, much shorter than the inner, ca. 2 mm long, linear-oblong to trian-
      gular; disk corollas apically 4-lobed; anthers 4; ray flowers with ligules bluntly 3-toothed (middle
      tooth sometimes notched)                                                                                 C. tinctoria
1. Disk corollas yellow; ray flowers with ligules completely yellow.
   3. Stems with leaves crowded near base (most on lower 1/2 of stem); leaves much reduced
      upwards; flowering peduncles usually > 15 cm long; most leaves undivided or with 1 or 2
      short side lobes (rarely more divided), the blades or divisions 5–30 mm wide                          C. lanceolata
   3. Stems with well-developed leaves nearly to the top; leaves only slightly reduced upwards;
      flowering peduncles usually < 15 cm long (rarely longer); most leaves 3–5 parted or divided
      to the midrib, the divisions 1–10 mm wide                                                            C. grandiflora a
342   ASTERACEAE/CREPIS

Coreopsis grandiflora T. Hogg ex Sweet var. longipes (Hook.) Torr. & A. Gray, (sp.: large-flowered;
var.: long-stalked), Perennial or annual; stems 0.3–1 m tall; leaves pinnately compound, the
lower terminal leaflets linear, becoming filiform apically; outer phyllaries ± lanceolate, shorter
to equaling inner phyllaries, to ca. 10 mm long; disk corollas apically 5-lobed; anthers 5; ray
flowers with ligules 1.3–2.5 cm long, 4–5-toothed; achenes winged, the wings entire. Sandy
woods, also cultivated as an ornamental and spreading; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers.
May.

Coreopsis lanceolata L., (lanceolate, lance-shaped), LANCE COREOPSIS. Perennial; stems 0.3–0.7 m
tall; outer phyllaries ± lanceolate, shorter to equaling inner phyllaries, 5–10 mm long; disk corol-
las apically 5-lobed; anthers 5; ray flowers with ligules 1.5–3 cm long, 4–5 toothed; achenes with
thin flat wings. Apparently planted and spreading along highways; Cooke, Dallas, Grayson,
Tarrant, and Williamson cos., also Somervell Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); mainly se and e TX.
Apr–May.

Coreopsis tinctoria Nutt., (of dyes), PLAINS COREOPSIS , CARDAMINE COREOPSIS , MANZANILLA
SILVESTRE, CALLIOPSIS. Annual; stems 0.6–1.2 m tall; leaves pinnately compound, the lower termi-
nal leaflets linear, becoming filiform apically; outer phyllaries very small; ray flowers with
ligules 1–1.5 cm long; achenes winged or wingless. Low moist areas, often sandy soils; widely
cultivated for its very showy flowers; nearly throughout TX, more abundant in e 1/2. May–Sep.
[C. cardaminaefolia (DC.) Torr. & A. Gray] This species has been used as a source of a range of
red and yellow dyes—hence the specific epithet (Tveten & Tveten 1993). m/85

Coreopsis wrightii (A. Gray) H.M. Parker, (for Charles Wright, 1811–1885, TX collector), ROCK
COREOPSIS. Annual; leaves pinnately compound; middle and upper leaves with narrow seg-
ments, the terminal leaflet of middle leaves > 3 times as long as wide, 1–3 mm wide; achenes
wingless. Calcareous soils; prairies; Grand Prairie to West Cross Timbers, s to Edwards Plateau;
endemic to c and nc TX and s OK. May–Jun. [C. basalis (A. Dietr.) S.F. Blake var. wrightii (A.
Gray) S.F. Blake]

Coreopsis basalis (A. Dietr.) S.F. Blake, (basal), GOLDEN-MANE COREOPSIS , cited by Hatch et al.
(1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), occurs just to the e (Freestone and Van Zandt cos.) and s of
nc TX (Smith 1976). It differs from the similar C. wrightii in having the middle and upper leaves
with broad segments, the terminal leaflet of the middle leaves usually < 3 times as long as wide
(ca. 5–15 mm wide).

Coreopsis nuecensisA. Heller, (presumably of the Nueces River area of TX), with disk corollas
yellow, ray flowers with ligules yellow, commonly with several reddish brown flecks a little
above the base, inner phyllaries dorsally pubescent, and median and lower stems commonly
glabrous or sometimes sparsely pubescent, was cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area
4 (Fig. 2). This TX endemic apparently occurs only to the e and s of nc TX (Smith 1976). E

Coreopsis nuecensoides E.B. Sm., (resembling C. nuecensis), CROWN COREOPSIS, with disk corollas
yellow, ray flowers with ligules yellow, commonly with several reddish brown flecks a little
above the base, inner phyllaries dorsally pubescent, and median and lower stems commonly
densely pubescent or sometimes sparsely pubescent, is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegeta-
tional area 4 (Fig. 2). It apparently occurs only to the e and s of nc TX (Smith 1976).

                                  CREPIS HAWK’S-BEARD
AA genus of ca. 200 species of the n hemisphere, s Africa, and South America; a number of
weeds and a few are cultivated as ornamentals. (Greek: crepis, a classical Greek name of some
plant that also meant sandal or boot, possibly alluding to the shape of the achene) (tribe
Lactuceae)
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             343




             Cirsium texanum [HEA]        Cirsium undulatum [GLE]                       Cirsium vulgare [REE]




Conyza canadensis var. canadensis [REE]    Conyza ramosissima [BB2]               Coreopsis grandiflora var. longipes [CUR]




     Coreopsis lanceolata [SID]              Coreopsis tinctoria [SID]                        Coreopsis wrightii [SID]
344   ASTERACEAE/CROPTILON

REFERENCES: Babcock 1947; Clausen 1949; Stebbins 1949; Vuilleumier 1973.

Crepis pulchra L., (handsome), SHOWY HAWK’S-BEARD. Taprooted annual 0.3–1 m tall; stem pu-
bescence glandular; sap milky; leaves more basally, alternate and reduced up the stem, with
glandular pubescence like the stems, oblanceolate or spatulate, toothed or pinnatifid; heads
numerous; involucres 8–12 mm high, glabrous; flowers all ligulate, yellow; achenes 4–6 mm
long, narrowly columnar, 10–12 ribbed; pappus of numerous hair-like bristles. Disturbed and weedy
areas; Dallas, Grayson, Hunt, and Tarrant cos.; mainly e TX. Apr–May. Native of Eurasia. I

                                    CROPTILON SCRATCH DAISY
Ours annual, usually glandular-pubescent herbs; stems not leafy to the top, the leaves decreas-
ing in size up the stem to small bracts near the top (but leafy to top in species outside nc TX);
leaves alternate, sessile, narrowly oblanceolate to linear, toothed to entire; heads in an open
panicle; ray flowers pistillate, fertile, with yellow ligules; disk flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas
yellow; achenes unribbed, 2–3 mm long; pappus of persistent bristles.

AA genus of 3 species of the se United States; previously treated by some in Haplopappus. (Ac-
cording to Rafinesque, author of the genus, the name means “col. feather,” possibly colored
feather, from the off white or rusty white pappus) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Hall 1928; Smith 1965, 1981; Nesom 1991b.

1. Ray flowers 5–11; ligules 3.9–6 mm long; receptacles 2.5–4 mm in diam., usually ca. 3 mm; e TX w
   to e edge of nc TX                                                                               C. divaricatum
1. Ray flowers 13–21; ligules 6–12 mm long; receptacles 3.5–7 mm in diam., usually 4.7–5.4 mm; e
   Blackland Prairie w through nc TX to e Rolling Plains                                          C. hookerianum

Croptilon divaricatum (Nutt.) Raf., (spreading, widely divergent), SLENDER GOLDENWEED,
SCRATCH DAISY, SPREADING GOLDEN-ASTER. Stems erect, 20–70(–115) cm tall; basal leaves 7–14 cm
long, 1.5–2 cm wide, the upper leaves smaller; peduncles with stalked glandular hairs. Dis-
turbed areas, sandy soils; Henderson and Limestone cos.; also Fannin, Lamar, and Milam cos.
(Smith 1965); e TX w to e edge of nc TX. Aug–Oct. [Haplopappusdivaricatus (Nutt.) A. Gray]

Croptilon hookerianum (Torr. & A. Gray) House, (for William Jackson Hooker, 1785–1865, direc-
tor of Kew Gardens). Stems erect, 30–75 cm tall; basal leaves 6–10 cm long, 1.2–3 cm wide, the
upper leaves smaller. Disturbed areas, sandy soils. Jul–Oct.

1. Ligules (2.4–)2.6–3.3 mm wide; peduncles never hispid, with short-stalked glandular pubescence
   (longest hairs ca. 0.2–0.3 mm long, including gland); probably only to the s of nc TX           var. hookerianum
1. Ligules 1.8–2.8(–3.1) mm wide; peduncles often slightly hispid just below heads, with long-stalked
   glandular pubescence (longest hairs ca. 0.4–0.5 mm long including gland); Blackland Prairie w to
   e Rolling Plains                                                                                       var. validum

var. hookerianum, cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), is a coastal plain
taxon that apparently occurs just s of nc TX (Smith 1965). [C. divaricatum var. hookerianum
(Torr. & A. Gray) Shinners, Haplopappusdivaricatus (Nutt.) A. Gray var. hookerianus (Torr. & A.
Gray) Waterfall]

var. validum (Rydb.) E.B. Sm., (strong). Blackland Prairie w to e Rolling Plains. [Haplopappus
validus (Rydb.) Cory, Haplopappusvalidus subsp. torreyi E.B. Sm.]

                              DRACOPIS CLASPING CONEFLOWER
A A monotypic North American genus; sometimes cultivated as an ornamental. (Greek:
drakon, dragon, in allusion to appendages on the style) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Cox & Urbatsch 1990, Urbatsch & Jansen 1995.
                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   345




 Crepis pulchra [UCP]


                                                    Croptilon divaricatum [GLE , HAL]




         Croptilon hookerianum var. validum [HEA]




Dracopis amplexicaulis [BB2]                                 Dysodiopsis tagetoides [HEA]
346   ASTERACEAE/DYSODIOPSIS

Dracopis amplexicaulis (Vahl) Cass., (stem-clasping), CLASPING CONEFLOWER, CLASPING-LEAF
CONEFLOWER , BLACK-EYED-SUSAN, CONEFLOWER. Annual herb 0.3–0.7 m tall, essentially gla-
brous; leaves alternate, oblong to ovate, cordate-clasping basally, toothed or entire, acute or
acuminate; heads peduncled, short cylindric; receptacles elongated, chaffy, the scales green-
tipped; ray flowers 5–10, neuter, infertile; ligules all yellow or yellow with reddish brown or
brownish purple blotch basally, ca. 10–25 mm long; disk flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas pur-
plish or brownish; achenes cylindrical to clavate; pappus absent. Disturbed habitats, particu-
larly moist areas; e 2/3 of TX. May. [Rudbeckia amplexicaulis Vahl] m/87

                      DYSODIOPSIS DOGWEED, FOETID-MARIGOLD
AA monotypic genus native to the s United States (Karis & Ryding 1994); previously recog-
nized in Dyssodia; we are following Karis and Ryding (1994), Kartesz (1994), and J. Kartesz (pers.
comm. 1997) in treating it separately. (Presumably from related genus Dyssodia, Greek: dysodia,
an ill smell, and opsis, aspect or appearance) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes lumped into
Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Johnston 1956; Johnston & Turner 1962; Strother 1969, 1986; Karis & Ryding 1994.

Dysodiopsis tagetoides (Torr. & A. Gray) Rydb., (resembling Tagetes—marigold), MARIGOLD
DOGWEED. Annual or short-lived perennial 0.4–0.9 m tall, glabrous; leaves mostly alternate, lin-
ear, 2–6 mm wide, with conspicuous, yellowish-brown or orange, dot-like glands, aromatic, the
margins with coarse, conspicuous teeth; involucres 9–12 mm high; ray flowers 7–12, with ligules
10–15 mm long, bright yellow; disk corollas brownish yellow; achenes 3–3.5 mm long; pappus of
10–12 scales with 1 to 3 awns per scale; x = 13. Calcareous soils; Bell, Dallas, and Grayson cos. w
to West Cross Timbers and s to c TX. Jun–Aug. [Dyssodia tagetoides Torr. & A. Gray,
Hymenatherum tagetoides (Torr. & A. Gray) A. Gray]

                  ECHINACEA CONEFLOWER, PURPLE CONEFLOWER
Perennial herbs; leaves alternate, the lower long-petioled; leaf blades simple, entire or subentire,
narrowly lanceolate to oblong or ovate, often with 3–5 prominent veins; heads large, solitary,
terminal, long-peduncled; ray flowers sterile, with ligules long, narrow, spreading to reflexed,
purple to pink or white; disk flowers fertile; disk with stiff, sharp-pointed, brownish to dark
reddish purple scales; pappus a short crown.

AA genus of 9 species of the e United States; according to McGregor (1968b), considerable
natural hybridization occurs. Echinacea species were widely used medicinally by Native
Americans for a variety of purposes and are still valued today as herbal medicines; they appar-
ently act as immune system stimulants; unfortunately wild populations are under pressure
from over-collecting (Foster 1991). (Greek: echinos, hedgehog, from the prickly scales of the disk
which protrude beyond the disk flowers) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES : McGregor 1968a, 1968b; Cox & Urbatsch 1990; Baskin et al. 1993; Urbatsch &
Jansen 1995.

1. Leaf blades abruptly contracted to the petiole, often rounded at base, broadly to narrowly ovate,
   the basal and lower ones 2–3(+) times as long as wide, 1–15 cm wide, usually toothed; cultivated
   species native to the e of nc TX                                                                     E. purpurea
1. Leaf blades gradually tapering to base, lanceolate to lanceolate-linear or narrowly elliptic, the
   basal and lower ones usually > 5 times as long as wide, 1–4 (+) cm wide, entire; native species.
   2. Ligules dark purple (rarely lighter), strongly recurved-reflexed so their tips nearly touch the
      peduncle, 2–3.5 cm long                                                                         E. atrorubens
   2. Ligules light purple to pink or white, spreading to drooping but not recurved-reflexed, 2–9 cm
      long.
                                                                                     ECLIPTA/ASTERACEAE       347

    3. Ligules when fully expanded (3–)4–9 cm long, clearly drooping, 1.5–2.5 times as long as
       breadth of disk; plants 0.5–1 m tall; pollen white                                               E. pallida
    3. Ligules when fully expanded 2–4 cm long, spreading, 1–1.5 times as long as breadth of disk;
       plants 0.2–0.7 m tall; pollen yellow                                                        E. angustifolia

Echinacea angustifolia DC., (narrow-leaved), BLACKSAMSON. Ligules light pink to light purplish
or white. Gravelly or rocky limestone prairies (on mixed sand and gravel farther w); Blackland
Prairie w to Plains Country and s to Edwards Plateau. May–Jun. [E. pallida var. angustifolia
(DC.) Cronquist] Barkley (1986) indicated that this species grades into E. pallida to the e;
Cronquist (1980) and Gandhi and Thomas (1989) treated it as a variety of E. pallida. We are fol-
lowing McGregor (1968a) and Baskin et al. (1993) in recognizing it at the specific level. It is
sometimes split into 2 varieties based on pubescence characters (e.g., McGregor 1968a; Kartesz
1994; Jones et al. 1997). Variety strigosa McGregor is said to differ in having consistently strigose
or strigose-hirsute leaves and upper stems. While numerous individuals annotated as both va-
riety angustifolia and variety strigosa are known from nc TX, virtually all are ± strigose or stri-
gose-hirsute. We are thus not distinguishing varieties.

Echinacea atrorubens Nutt., (dark red). Stems 0.3–0.9 m tall; pollen yellow. Limestone hillsides;
Cooke, Denton, Red River, and Tarrant cos.; endemic to a narrow band from se TX n through nc
TX to Ardmore, OK and Topeka, KN. May–Jul.

Echinacea pallida (Nutt.) Nutt., (pale), PALE ECHINACEA. Ligules purplish pink to whitish. Sandy
open woods and prairies; Grayson, Lamar, and Tarrant cos., also Fannin Co. (McGregor 1968a); e
TX w to East Cross Timbers. May–Jun.

Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench, (purple). Stems 0.6–1.8 m tall; ligules 3–8 cm long, drooping,
reddish purple (rarely pink or white); pollen yellow. Cultivated in nc TX and persists or spreads;
Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); e TX. May–Sep.

Echinacea sanguinea Nutt., (blood red), of se and e TX, occurs just e of nc TX (c Henderson Co.).
It can be distinguished from E. angustifolia and E. pallida using the following characters: it has
nearly hemispheric heads (10–20 mm high) vs. conical (15–40 mm high), smaller achenes (ca. 3
mm long vs. 3.5–5 mm long), ligules 4–7 cm long, and pollen yellow. [E. pallida var. sanguinea
Nutt.) Gandhi & R.D. Thomas]

                                                  ECLIPTA
AA genus of 4 species found in warm areas of the world. (Greek: ecleipo, to be deficient or lack,
alluding to the absence of pappus) (tribe Heliantheae, can also be keyed using Astereae key)

Eclipta prostrata (L.) L., (prostrate, flat to the ground), PIEPLANT, YERBA DE TAGO. Low, prostrate to
erect, appressed-scabrous-pubescent annual, usually freely branched; leaves opposite, sessile or
short petiolate, lanceolate to narrowly elliptic, entire or slightly toothed, dark green; heads
small, short-peduncled, terminal and in upper leaf axils, rather inconspicuous; ray flowers nu-
merous, fertile, with ligules linear, very short (ca. 1 mm long), white; disk flowers perfect; disk
corollas minute, whitish; achenes 2–2.5 mm long; pappus none or very obscure. Ditches, shore-
lines, stream banks; throughout TX. Jun–Nov. [E. alba (L.) Hassk.] Gandhi and Thomas (1989)
explained why the correct name is E. prostrata. This species has been introduced into the Old
World and in India is used as a blackish dye for hair and tattooing (Mabberley 1997).

                             ELEPHANTOPUS ELEPHANT’S-FOOT
AA mainly tropical and warm area genus of ca. 30 species. (Greek: elephas, elephant, and pous,
foot; translation of aboriginal name) (tribe Vernonieae)
REFERENCES: Gleason 1906, 1922; Clonts & McDaniel 1978; Jones 1982.
348   ASTERACEAE/ENGELMANNIA

Elephantopus carolinianus Raeusch., (of Carolina), LEAFY ELEPHANTOPUS. Pubescent perennial
herb, 30–90 cm tall; basal leaves absent at flowering time; leaves alternate, oblanceolate-elliptic,
5–18 cm long, to 9 cm wide; 3 foliaceous bracts subtending glomerules of heads ovate, acute; in-
volucres subcylindric, the phyllaries stramineous; ray flowers absent; disk flowers 3 or 4 per
head, the corollas pinkish white to lavender, 5-lobed; achenes cylindrical, antrorsely pubescent;
pappus bristles persistent, basally dilated and indurated. Low wooded areas; se and e TX w to
Grand Prairie, also Edwards Plateau. Aug–Oct.

             ENGELMANNIA ENGELMANN’S DAISY, CUT-LEAF DAISY
AA monotypic genus native to North America; sometimes cultivated as an ornamental.
(Named for Dr. George Engelmann, 1809–1884, German-born botanist and physician of St.
Louis) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Turner & Johnston 1956; Goodman & Lawson 1992.

Engelmannia peristenia (Raf.) Goodman & C.A. Lawson, (possibly from Greek: perisso, beyond
the regular number or size, odd in number, and tenia, band, ribbon), ENGELMANN’S DAISY, CUT-
LEAF DAISY. Densely hispid-pubescent perennial with woody taproot; stems spreading to erect,
0.2–1 m tall; leaf blades 8–30 cm long, pinnately divided nearly to midrib, the lobes again lobed
or toothed; inflorescences of several long-peduncled heads; involucres 6–10 mm high; ray flow-
ers with ligules ca. 1 cm long, yellow, curling under during daytime, expanded from late after-
noon to mid-morning; disk corollas numerous, dark yellow; pappus of a few scales. Clayey or
occasionally sandy prairies and limestone outcrops; nearly throughout TX except forested
sandy areas of e part of state. Apr–Jul (rarely later). [E. pinnatifida Torr. & A. Gray] Goodman
and Lawson (1992) documented that E. peristenia is an older name (published 1832) than the
long established E. pinnatifida (published 1840). Farmers and ranchers refer to this as an “ice
cream” plant because it is preferred by livestock; it is therefore now rarely seen except along
roadsides or other areas inaccessible to grazing animals (J. Stanford, pers. comm.).

                         ERECHTITES BURNWEED, FIREWEED
AA genus of 15 species native to the Americas; some contain alkaloids. (An ancient Greek
name, erechthites, used by Dioscorides for somes species of Senecio—groundsel) (tribe
Senecioneae)
REFERENCES: Belcher 1956; Vuilleumier 1969a; Barkley & Cronquist 1978.

Erechtites hieraciifolia (L.) Raf. ex DC., (with leaves like Hieracium —hawkweed), AMERICAN
BURNWEED, FIREWEED. Annual herb, glabrescent or with sparse, jointed hairs; stems 0.1–2.5 m
tall; leaves alternate, numerous, elliptic to lanceolate or oblanceolate, 3–20 cm long, sharply
doubly serrate and sometimes irregularly lobed, sometimes clasping, well-distributed up stem,
the uppermost reduced; inflorescence an elongate to corymbose cyme of few–many heads; in-
volucres cylindrical; main phyllaries ca. 12–14, in 1 series, ± equal, 9–17 mm long, with a few,
very small bracts at base; heads of disk-like flowers only; ligulate ray flowers absent; flowers
whitish or cream-white; peripheral flowers pistillate, with tubular-filiform corollas; central
flowers perfect; achenes all alike, ribbed, columnar, ca. 2–3 mm long; pappus of numerous cap-
illary bristles, deciduous. Wet areas; Fannin (Talbot property) and Lamar cos. in Red River
drainage, also Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); mainly se and e TX. Aug–Nov. [E.
hieraciifolia var. intermedia Fernald, Senecio hieraciifolia L.]

                  ERIGERON FLEABANE, DAISY FLEABANE, DAISY
Annual to perennial herbs; leaves alternate, sessile or the lower petioled, oblong or oblanceolate
to linear, entire or toothed; heads solitary or corymbose; ray flowers numerous, often 30–150,
                                                                       ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   349




                                                                                  Echinacea angustifolia [BB2]




                           Echinacea atrorubens [HEA]




                                                                                      Echinacea pallida [ GLE]




Echinacea purpurea [GLE]                    Eclipta prostrata [MAS ]
350   ASTERACEAE/ERIGERON

pistillate, fertile, the ligules narrow (to ca. 1.2 mm wide), white to blue, lavender or pink, never
yellow, curling under at night or in age; disk flowers usually perfect and fertile, the corollas yel-
low; achenes flattened, usually strongly 2-ribbed; pappus various, of hair-like bristles or of 2
whorls (bristles and small bristles or scales).

AA cosmopolitan genus (especially North America) of ca. 413 species (G. Nesom, pers. comm.)
including a number of cultivated ornamentals. Closely related to Conyza (Cronquist 1947) and
not sharply distinguished from it. Erigeron species are sometimes difficult to distinguish.
Barkley (1986) indicated, “As with many widespread genera in the Asteraceae, the species
boundaries are not always sharp, and morphological intermediates are to be expected.” Guy
Nesom (pers. comm.) indicated, however, that very few Erigeron species hybridize. (Greek: eri ,
early, and geron, old man; the ancient name of an early-flowering plant with fluffy white seed
heads) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Cronquist 1943, 1947; Shinners 1947a; Van Vleet 1951; Nesom 1978, 1989a.

1. Plants small, 10–30 cm tall; with distinct taproot (obviously longer than lateral roots).
   2. Plants annuals; spring form with peduncles less than 4 cm long; usually in sandy habitats;
      taproot neither noticeably enlarged nor woody                                                             E. geiserii
   2. Plants perennials; spring form with peduncles 4–12 cm long; usually in calcareous habitats;
      taproot typically enlarged and woody                                                                  E. modestus
1. Plants of various heights, but often much > 30 cm tall; with shallow, stubby crown and fibrous
   roots.
   3. Upper and middle stem leaves widest basally or nearly so, clasping, 4–20 mm wide, 2–4 times
      as long as wide; lower leaves on broadly margined or winged petioles; pappus of disk flowers
      of a single whorl of ca. 20–30 bristles                                                         E. philadelphicus
   3. Upper and middle stem leaves narrowed basally, slightly or not clasping, usually 1–10 mm
      wide, 4–10 times as long as wide; lower leaves on narrowly winged or wingless petioles;
      pappus of disk flowers of 2 whorls, the inner of 10–15 bristles, the outer of small scales.
      4. Ray flowers with ligules purplish or bluish or white above and colored beneath; ray flowers
         with pappus of long hairs similar to disk flowers; stems 10–40 cm tall, with 7–15 leaves
         below inflorescence on well-developed plants; basal leaves usually 15 mm wide or less                  E. tenuis
      4. Ray flowers with ligules white, rarely bluish; ray flowers with minute pappus, the disk flow-
         ers with pappus of long hairs; stems 30–150 cm tall, with 17–25 leaves below inflorescence
         on well-developed plants (some of the leaves quite reduced); basal leaves to 70 mm wide.
         5. Upper stem pubescence of mostly incurved or appressed hairs; stems 30–70 cm tall; stem
            leaves typically well-developed, linear to lanceolate, entire or the lower or middle slightly
            toothed, the teeth usually with rounded sides; widespread in nc TX                              E. strigosus
         5. Upper stem pubescence, at least some, long and spreading; stems 60–150 cm tall; stem
            leaves often rather reduced, lanceolate or wider, all except the upper toothed, often con-
            spicuously so, the teeth straight-sided; rare in nc TX (known only in Red River drainage)          E. annuus

Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers., (annual), ANNUAL FLEABANE. Annual; involucres 3–5 mm high; disks
6–10 mm across; ray flowers with ligules ca. 5–10 mm long. Prairies or open ground, various soils;
in nc TX known only from Grayson Co.; also scattered in e TX and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun.

Erigeron geiseri Shinners, (for Samuel Wood Geiser, 1890–1983, professor at Southern Methodist
Univ.), BASIN FLEABANE. Stems erect, 7–30 cm tall; ligules white to rosy or lavender; pappus of 2
whorls—10 scabrous bristles and as many small scales. Sandy prairies; Archer, Clay, Dallas,
Falls, Palo Pinto, and Young cos.; se TX w to Edwards Plateau and n to nc TX and Rolling Plains.
Late Mar–Jun.

Erigeron modestus A. Gray, (modest), PLAINS FLEABANE. Perennial, often grayish pubescent;
stems 10–20(–30) cm tall; producing two crops of stems: first one beginning to flower in late
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     351




         Elephantopus carolinianus [BB2]




                                                                       Engelmannia peristenia [BB2]




Erechtites hieraciifolia [ PNW]




 Erigeron annuus [ REE]                    Erigeron geiseri [HEA]                      Erigeron modestus [HEA]
352   ASTERACEAE/EUPATORIUM

Mar–Apr, with crowded, deeply lobed basal leaves and long, naked peduncles; from Apr–Jun de-
veloping into a much-branched plant with narrowly oblanceolate or linear-lanceolate leaves
(the basal ones withered); by fall (Sep–Nov) producing a bushy-branched mass of often sprawl-
ing or decumbent stems with narrow leaves only, and shorter-peduncled heads; ray flowers
with ligules ca. 4–8 mm long; pappus with 2 whorls—bristles and much shorter bristles or
scales. Gravelly or rocky limestone; Cooke to Burnet cos. s and w to w TX (ca. w 1/2 of nc TX).
Apr–Oct.

Erigeron philadelphicus L., (of the Philadelphia region), PHILADELPHIA FLEABANE. Perennial with-
out rhizomes; stems 15–70 cm tall; involucres 4–6 mm high; disk 6–15 mm across; ray flowers
with ligules ca. 5–10 mm long, usually white to light pink. Low prairies and stream banks; cal-
careous clay; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Mar–May.

Erigeron strigosus Muhl. ex Willd., (strigose, with stiff bristles). Erratic as to duration: com-
monly biennial, sometimes annual, occasionally perennial; ray flowers with ligules to ca. 6 mm
long. Prairies, open woods, pastures, roadsides; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers; in Red
River drainage to e Rolling Plains (Wichita Co.), s to Llano Co. in c TX. Apr–Jun, sporadically to
Oct. Sometimes 2 varieties are recognized; Cronquist (1980) considered them ill-defined.

1. Inflorescences diffuse (= widely spreading), subnaked; heads tiny, the involucres 2–3 mm tall
                                                                                                          var.. beyrichii
1. Inflorescences not diffuse, or if so, then somewhat leafy; heads usually larger, the involucres (2–)
   2.5–5 mm tall                                                                                          var. strigosus

var. beyrichii (Fisch. & C.A. Mey.) Torr. & A. Gray ex A. Gray, (for Heinrich Karl Beyrich, 1796–
1834, Prussian botanist who collected in GA, SC, and TX). Similar to variety strigosusand some-
times lumped with that variety (Correll & Johnston 1970).

var. strigosus. PRAIRIE FLEABANE, WHITETOP.

Erigeron tenuis Torr. & A. Gray, (slender, thin), SLENDER FLEABANE. Annual or biennial (rarely
perennial?); ray flowers with ligules ca. 2.5–5 mm long. Sandy open woods and roadsides; se and
e TX w to West Cross Timbers and e Edwards Plateau. Mar–May. There is evidence of introgres-
sive hybridization between this species and E. strigosus(Cronquist 1947).

                          EUPATORIUM BONESET, THOROUGHWORT
Ours herbaceous perennials (1 species a shrub); leaves mostly opposite or in E. capillifolium
mostly alternate; heads corymbose; ray flowers absent; disk flowers white, blue, pink, or pur-
plish; achenes blackish, 5-ribbed; pappus of persistent bristles.

AThe genus is mainly American with some Old World species. It is variously treated as in-
cluding up to 1,200 species or segregated into a number of smaller genera (Eupatorium sensu
stricto 45 species); if split according to some authorities (e.g., Robinson & King 1985; King &
Robinson 1987; Bremer et al. 1994; Jones et al. 1997), the 6 nc TX species go in 4 different genera,
Ageratina , Conoclinium, Eupatorium in a strict sense, and Fleischmannia. It is difficult to
know how to treat this group; for practical reasons, we are following Cronquist (1980), McVaugh
(1982), and Gandhi and Thomas (1989) in treating the genus in the traditional broad sense;
however, appropriate synonymy is given below. In referring to this group, Stebbins (1993) ar-
gued that, “While microscopic characters should by no means be overlooked, their use to estab-
lish new genera that are not distinct on the basis of any other characteristics should be discour-
aged.” However, based on the cladistic analysis of the Eupatorieae by Bremer et al. (1994),
Eupatorium sensu lato is apparently polyphyletic. The common name BONESET is apparently
derived from the historic use in treating dengue fever, also known as break-bone fever (Tveten &
                                                                                      EUPATORIUM/ASTERACEAE         353

Tveten 1993). (Named for Mithridates Eupator, 132–63 B.C., King of Pontus, who is said to have
used a species of the genus in medicine or as an antidote for poison) (tribe Eupatorieae)
REFERENCES: Grant 1953; King & Robinson 1970a, 1970b, 1970c, 1970d, 1987; Clewell & Wooten
1971; Wooten & Clewell 1971; Sullivan 1975; Cronquist 1980; McVaugh 1982; Robinson & King
1985; Warnock 1987b; Gandhi & Thomas 1989; Bremer et al. 1994.

1. Leaves connate-perfoliate (= united in pairs around the stem); in nc TX known only from Red
   River drainage                                                                                         E. perfoliatum
1. Leaves distinct, not united; including species widespread in nc TX.
   2. Leaves or their segments finely dissected into filiform (= thread-like) segments < 1 mm wide
                                                                                                         E. capillifolium
   2. Leaves not finely dissected into filiform segments.
      3. Plant a rounded, much-branched shrub with deltoid leaves and pinkish-white to white flow-
         ers; mainly rocky limstone areas on Edwards Plateau, in nc TX known only from s part of
         Lampasas Cut Plain (segregate genus Ageratina)                                                     E. havanense
      3. Plant herbaceous (but stems can be coarse in some species); leaves narrowly elliptic to
         ovate or deltoid; flowers white to pink, blue, or purplish blue; widespread in nc TX.
         4. Leaves narrowly elliptic, prominently 3-nerved, sessile or with petioles 1–2 mm long
                                                                                                           E. altissimum
         4. Leaves ovate to deltoid, if 3-nerved, at base only, distinctly petiolate.
            5. Corollas blue or purplish blue; receptacles conical (segregate genus Conoclinium)          E. coelestinum
            5. Corollas white or pink; receptacles flat.
               6. Corollas pink or whitish with the distal portion pink (distal portion rarely lavender-
                  pink or white); stems weak, sprawling or scandent; involucres 5–6 mm long (segre-
                  gate genus Fleischmannia )                                                               E. incarnatum
               6. Corollas white; stems usually erect or ascending; involucres 3–5 mm long.
                  7. Phyllaries clearly varying in length, obviously pubescent, resin-dotted (under
                     magnification)                                                                          E. serotinum
                  7. Phyllaries all about the same length, nearly glabrous or with pubescent tips, not
                     resin-dotted (segregate genus Ageratina)                                                  E. rugosum

Eupatorium altissimum L., (very tall), TALL EUPATORIUM, TALL THOROUGHWORT. Rhizomatous pe-
rennial; leaves mostly opposite; leaf blades narrowly elliptic; petioles 0–2 mm long; involucres
3.8–4.3 mm high; phyllaries rounded apically; corollas white. Prairies; Collin, Denton, Fannin,
Grayson, Lamar, and Tarrant cos.; also e TX. Aug–Oct.

Eupatorium capillifolium (Lam.) Small, (hair-leaved), DOGFENNEL , DOGFENNEL EUPATORIUM,
CYPRESSWEED. Erect perennial to 3 m tall; leaves mostly alternate, dissected; involucres 2–3 mm
high; corollas white. Disturbed areas, sandy soils; Dallas, Lamar, and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and
e TX. Sep–Nov.

Eupatorium coelestinum L., (sky-blue), MISTFLOWER, BLUE BONESET. Rhizomatous perennial;
leaves opposite; leaf blades deltoid; petioles 3–20 mm long; involucres 3–5 mm high; phyllaries
linear-subulate; corollas blue or purplish blue. Moist situations, often wooded areas, sandy or
calcareous soils; East and West cross timbers; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau.
Aug–Nov. Sometimes (e.g., Jones et al. 1997) recognized in the genus Conoclinium [as C.
coelestinum (L.) DC.]. If segregated, Conoclinium is a genus of 3 species of the e United States
and Mexico (Mabberley 1997).

Eupatorium havanense Kunth, (of Havana), SHRUBBY BONESET. Rounded, much-branched shrub
(0.3–)0.6–1.5(–2) m tall; leaves opposite; leaf blades deltoid, (2–)3–5(–7) cm long; petioles 3–10
(–15) mm long; involucres 4–6 mm high; phyllaries linear; corollas pinkish-white to white.
Rocky limestone areas; in nc TX known only from Bell (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997) and Burnet
354   ASTERACEAE/EUTHAMIA

(C. Sexton, pers. comm.) cos. in s part of Lampasas Cut Plain; mainly Edwards Plateau. (Sep–)
Oct–Nov. Despite the epithet, this species is native to TX; it also occurs in Mexico and on Carib-
bean islands. [E. ageratifolium DC. var. texense Torr. & A. Gray, E. texense (Torr. & A. Gray)
Rydb.] Now sometimes (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997) recognized in the segregate genus
Ageratina [as A. havanensis (Kunth) R.M. King & H. Rob.]. If segregated, Ageratina is a genus of
ca. 290 species of the e United States and c and w South America (Mabberley 1997). Eupatorium
wrightii A. Gray, a somewhat similar rounded shrub of the Trans-Pecos, has been implicated in
the sudden death of cattle (appearing as though “shot and instantly killed”); feeding experi-
ments also resulted in death (Kingsbury 1964). The smaller leaf blades (1–2 cm long) and
shorter petioles (2–5 mm long) distinguish E. wrightii from E. havanense. 9

Eupatorium incarnatum Walter, (flesh-colored), PINK EUPATORIUM, PINK BONESET. Perennial from
fibrous-rooted crown, scandent, to 2 m tall; leaves opposite; leaf blades deltoid; petioles 2 mm or
more long; involucres 5–6 mm high; phyllaries lance-subulate; corollas whitish, with pink or
lilac apically. Bottomlands, woodlands; Dallas, Fannin, Grayson, Hunt, Kaufman, Limestone,
Rockwall, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX. Oct–Nov. Sometimes (e.g., Jones et al. 1997)
recognized in the genus Fleischmannia [as F. incarnata (Walter) R.M. King & H. Rob.]. If segre-
gated, Fleischmannia is a genus of 80 species of North America and w South America
(Mabberley 1997).

Eupatorium perfoliatum L., (perfoliate, with leaf surrounding the stem), BONESET, THOROUGH-
WORT, AGUEWEED. Rhizomatous perennial; leaves opposite, lanceolate, perfoliate; involucres 3–5
mm high; corollas whitish. Sandy soils; Grayson and Lamar cos. in Red River drainage; mainly
se and e TX. Aug–Nov. This species contains the glucoside, eupatorin, and has been variously
used medicinally (Duke 1985).

Eupatorium rugosum Houtt., (rugose, wrinkled), WHITE SNAKEROOT, SNAKEROOT, RICHWEED,
FALLPOISON. Perennial from a fibrous crown; leaves opposite; leaf blades deltoid-ovate to lance-
ovate; petioles about 1/3 as long as blades; involucres 4–5 mm high; corolla lobes pubescent dor-
sally. Low woods; Grayson Co. in Red River drainage (Hagerman N.W.R.); mainly se and e TX;
also Edwards Plateau. Sep–Nov. Now sometimes (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997) recognized
in the segregate genus Ageratina [as A. altissima (L.) R.M. King & H. Rob.]. All parts of WHITE
SNAKEROOT contain tremetol, a complex alcohol, and glycosides; it is poisonous to livestock.
During colonial times cows eating SNAKEROOT passed the poison through their milk causing
“milk sickness” in humans (Hardin & Arena 1974); numerous deaths resulted, in some areas the
human population was reduced to less than 1/2 the original number, and whole villages were
abandoned (Kingsbury 1964); in livestock the condition is known as “trembles” (Stephens
1980). Other species are not known to contain the toxin. 9

Eupatorium serotinum Michx., (late-flowering), LATE EUPATORIUM, LATE-FLOWERING THOROUGH-
WORT, FALL BONESET. Rhizomatous; leaves mostly opposite; leaf blades narrowly ovate; petioles
10–30 mm long; involucres 3–5 mm high; phyllaries linear; flowers whitish. Open areas, dis-
turbed sites; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov.

                        EUTHAMIA FLAT-TOPPED-GOLDENROD
AA North American genus of 8 species; similar to and often lumped into Solidago as a section
or subgenus (Sieren 1981); some authors (e.g., Cronquist 1980) suggest the genus may be more
closely related to Gutierrezia . (Possibly either from Greek: eu, well, and [?], crowded, from dense
inflorescences (Semple 1993), or Greek: euthemon, neat or pretty) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Cronquist 1980; Sieren 1981; Taylor & Taylor 1983; Semple 1992.
Euthamia gymnospermoides Greene, (gymnosperm-like), VISCID EUTHAMIA, FLAT-TOPPED-GOLD-
ENROD. Rhizomatous, ± glabrous perennial; stems to 1 m tall; basal and lower stem leaves early
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      355




 Erigeron philadelphicus [GLE]     Erigeron strigosus var. strigosus [BB2]
                                                                                      Erigeron tenuis [GLE]




Eupatorium altissimum [BB2]



                                 Eupatorium capillifolium [ REE]                 Eupatorium coelestinum [CO1]




Eupatorium havanense [HEA]       Eupatorium incarnatum [BB2]                      Eupatorium perfoliatum [GWO]
356   ASTERACEAE/EVAX

deciduous; persistent stem leaves numerous, alternate, linear or linear-lanceolate, 4–9 cm long,
1.5–4(–8) mm wide, entire, strongly glandular-punctate, sessile; inflorescences broad, cymose,
with numerous, ± sessile, small heads; involucres 4–6.5 mm high; flowers with sweet fragrance;
ray flowers pistillate and fertile; ligules yellow, 1–3 mm long; disk flowers fewer than ray flow-
ers, perfect and fertile, the corollas yellow; achenes hairy; pappus of numerous whitish, hair-
like bristles. Open woods, prairies; Lamar and Montague cos; also se and e TX and Plains Coun-
try. Oct–Nov. [E. camporumGreene, E. pulverulenta Greene, Solidago gymnospermoides(Greene)
Fernald, Solidago graminifolia (L.) Nutt. var. gymnospermoides(Greene) Croat]

                           EVAX RABBIT’S-TOBACCO, COTTON-ROSE
Very small annuals with taproots, usually less than 10(–15) cm tall, densely and conspicuously
white- to gray-pubescent with woolly hairs; stems usually branched; leaves alternate or upper-
most crowded and apparently whorled, small (ca. 2–15 mm long), linear or oblanceolate, entire;
heads sessile, in dense clusters, axillary or terminal, small and inconspicuous, woolly-pubes-
cent; true involucres absent; ray flowers absent; pappus absent.

AA genus of ca. 15–20 species (Mabberley 1987) native from the Mediterranean to c Asia, also
North America; sometimes lumped into Filago (e.g., Anderberg 1991; Mabberley 1997). We are
following Jones et al. (1997) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in maintaining it as a separate ge-
nus. (Derivation of generic name not explained by original author) (tribe Inuleae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1951e; Anderberg 1991; Morefield 1992.

1. Clusters of heads axillary, distributed along the elongate stems; central flowers of heads usually
   fertile                                                                                                E. candida
1. Clusters of heads nearly all terminal at the branch tips; central flowers of head usually infertile.
   2. Bracts among the heads shorter than or equal to the heads in length (bracts thus largely
      concealed by dense, woolly pubescence associated with the heads); ultimate clusters of heads
      subtended by leaves 3–10 mm long that simulate an involucre                                            E. verna
   2. Bracts among the heads exceeding the heads in length (bracts thus conspicuously visible
      protruding from between the crowded heads); ultimate clusters of heads subtended by leaves
      6–12 mm long that simulate an involucre                                                             E. proliferaa

Evax candida (Torr. & A. Gray) A. Gray, (pure white, shining), SILVER EVAX. Clusters of heads
mostly sessile in the leaf axils. Sandy open woods, prairies, fields, and roadsides; Bell, Burnet,
Dallas, Henderson, Limestone, and Parker cos.; also Hood, Somervell, and Tarrant cos. (R.
O’Kennon, pers. obs.); se and e TX rarely w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Apr–May. [Filago can-
dida (Torr. & A. Gray) Shinners]

Evax prolifera Nutt. ex DC., (producing offshoots), BIG-HEAD EVAX. Clayey or rocky ground on
limestone; widespread in TX from Blackland Prairie w. Apr–Jun. [Filago prolifera (Nutt. ex DC.)
Britton]

Evax verna Raf., (of Spring), MANY-STEM EVAX. Sandy or eroding silty or rocky ground; nearly
throughout TX. Apr–Jun. [E. multicaulis DC., Filago verna (Raf.) Shinners]

                                                     FACELIS
AA South American genus of 3 species. (Derivation of generic name unknown) (tribe Inuleae)
REFERENCE: Anderberg 1991.

Facelis retusa (Lam.) Sch.Bip., (retuse, notched slightly at a rounded apex). Annual herb from a
taproot; stems 6–20(–30) cm tall, erect or with decumbent branches, white-gray woolly; leaves
alternate, simple, entire, linear-spatulate, 7–20(–30) mm long, 1.5–4 mm wide, ± sessile; heads in
a terminal cluster; involucres 8–11 mm high; phyllaries mostly scarious or partly greenish, the
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS                357




Eupatorium rugosum [REE]       Eupatorium serotinum [BB2]                         Euthamia gymnospermoides [STE]




   Evax candida [HEA]                Evax prolifera [BB2]                                 Evax verna [SHI]




   Facelis retusa [MAR]    Gaillardia aestivalis var. aestivalis [BB1]       Gaillardia aestivalis var. flavovirens [STE]
358   ASTERACEAE/GAILLARDIA

inner often pigmented near tip; ray flowers absent; disk flowers of 2 types: the central ca. 3–5
perfect and fertile, with corollas 5-toothed, white; the peripheral 10–25 pistillate, with corollas
filiform, truncate or obscurely toothed, white; achenes white hairy; pappus of numerous whit-
ish, strongly plumose, hair-like bristles 10–11 mm long, surpassing the corollas. Lawn weed,
roadsides, disturbed areas; Dallas and Tarrant cos.; mainly e TX. Apr–May. Native of South
America. [Gnaphalium retusum Lam.] I

                    GAILLARDIA INDIAN-BLANKET, BLANKET-FLOWER
Low, pubescent annuals or perennials; leaves basal or alternate, entire, toothed, or lobed, peti-
oled to ± clasping; heads large, solitary or corymbose; phyllaries herbaceous or with hardened
base, narrow, loose; ray flowers infertile; ligules widened and lobed apically, yellow to dark or-
ange or red, or ligules absent; disks rounded-conical to subglobose, the perfect disk flowers usu-
ally intermixed with bristles or slender toothed scales; disk corollas yellow to reddish purple or
reddish brown; pappus of awned scales, the awns ca. as long as the scale body.

AA genus of 28 species native to North America and temperate South America; includes culti-
vated ornamentals. (Named for M. Gaillard de Charentoneau, 18th century French magistrate
and patron of botany) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes lumped into Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Biddulph 1944; Turner & Whalen 1975; Heywood & Levin 1984.

1. Leaves ± all basal; ray flowers with ligules very short and inconspicuous or absent                            G. suavis
1. Leaves conspicuously extending up the stem, alternate; ray flowers with ligules usually present
   (sometimes absent), the ligules short to long, often showy.
   2. Ligules of ray flowers usually reddish tipped with orangish yellow; lobes of disk corollas nar-
      rowly triangular-acuminate, short, much < 1/2 as long as the corolla tube (note: the margins
      of the disk corolla lobes have long, moniliform, often purplish red hairs which can obscure the
      lobe shape); receptacles (look between the disk flowers) with well-developed bristles ca. as
      long as the achenes                                                                                      G. pulchella
   2. Ligules of ray flowers usually yellow or yellow with red at base; lobes of disk corollas narrowed
      to linear tip, very long, the lobes ca. 1/2 as long as the corolla tube or longer (margins of lobes
      can have hairs as in G. pulchella); receptacles naked or nearly so                                       G. aestivalis

Gaillardia aestivalis (Walter) H. Rock, (summer), PRAIRIE GAILLARDIA. Annual or short-lived pe-
rennial 12–65 cm tall, as broad as tall or usually narrower, with slender to stout taproot, usually
single-stemmed; leaves mostly sessile; disks 15–25 mm across; ray flowers usually with ligules
(8–)10–15 mm long or ligules sometimes absent; achenes ca. 2 mm long; pappus scales 5–6 mm
long, with a slightly longer awn. Sandy open woods, sandy prairies, disturbed areas. May–Oct.

1. Disks purple-brown; ray flowers with ligules partly red or wholly yellow or absent                         var. aestivalis
1. Disks yellow; ray flowers with ligules yellow                                                            var. flavovirens

var. aestivalis. LANCE-LEAF GAILLARDIA, PRAIRIE GAILLARDIA, YELLOW INDIAN-BLANKET. Se and e
TX w to East and West cross timbers and Edwards Plateau. [G. fastigiata Greene, G. lanceolata
Michx.]

var. flavovirens (C. Mohr) Cronquist, (yellow-green), YELLOW INDIAN BLANKET. Included based on
citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX. [G.
lanceolata Michx. var. flavovirens C. Mohr]

Gaillardia pulchella Foug., (handsome), INDIAN-BLANKET, FIRE-WHEELS, ROSE-RING GAILLARDIA.
State wildflower of Oklahoma (Tyrl et al. 1994). Low annual 10–60 cm tall, pubescent to hispid-
pilose, developing wide-spreading branches; leaves oblong to ovate-lanceolate, the upper clasp-
ing, entire or the lower toothed or lobed; ray corollas with ligules 10–20 mm long, reddish with
                                                                                   GAMOCHAETA/ASTERACEAE          359

narrow to wide orangish yellow zone at tip, or rarely all yellow; disk corollas dark red-brown,
rarely yellow; achenes ca. 2 mm long; pappus scales 5–6 mm long, with an awn of ca. equal
length. Prairies, disturbed areas; nearly throughout TX. May–Jun, sporadically later. Very showy
and often abundant on roadsides; one of the most common wildflowers in nc TX. m/90

Gaillardia suavis (A. Gray & Engelm.) Britton & Rusby, (sweet), RAYLESS GAILLARDIA, FRAGRANT
GAILLARDIA, GLOBE-FLOWER, PERFUME -BALL. Perennial 30–80 cm tall forming beds from ob-
liquely branching roots; leaves slightly fleshy, oblanceolate or obovate, varying from entire to
deeply lobed; disk flowers with heavy, sweet scent; ray flowers with ligules very short or absent,
if present orange brownish, inconspicuous; achenes ca. 2.5 mm long; pappus scales ca. 4–5 mm
long, with an awn of ca. equal length. Sandy or rocky prairies and roadsides; Blackland Prairie
w through 2/3 of TX. Apr–May, sporadically later.

                           GAMOCHAETA CUDWEED, EVERLASTING
Annual or biennial herbs, whitish to grayish with felty or woolly pubescence; leaves alternate,
linear to narrowly oblong, oblanceolate, spatulate or obovate, sometimes ± glabrous above,
sessile or with narrow petiolar base; heads disciform, nearly sessile in the upper axils, together
spike-like in appearance; phyllaries scarious, sometimes pink-tinged; flowers inconspicuous;
pappus bristles deciduous as a ring.

AA genus of 52 species; mainly South American, with 5–6 in North America, and a few in
other parts of the world (Nesom 1990a; Anderberg 1991). Gamochaeta was previously included
in Gnaphalium, and while distinct from that genus, a more narrowly defined Gamochaeta is
still possibly paraphyletic (Anderberg 1991). (Greek: gamo, marriage, and chaeto, bristle, in allu-
sion to the pappus bristles falling together) (tribe Inuleae)
REFERENCES: Nesom 1990a; Anderberg 1991.

1. Leaves obovate or spatulate to oblanceolate, 5–20 mm wide, less densely pubescent on upper
   surface, strongly to weakly bicolored (= the 2 sides different in color); basal leaves present or
   absent at flowering time.
   2. Leaves whitened or silvery beneath with tight, felty-woolly pubescence, green or brownish
      and sparsely pubescent above; involucres densely woolly at base, otherwise nearly glabrous
                                                                                                          G. purpurea
   2. Leaves gray-green on both surfaces, loosely woolly beneath, greener and less pubescent above;
      involucres abundantly loose-woolly, often buried in tangle of hairs, the hairs not limited to the
      base                                                                                            G. pensylvanica a
1. Leaves linear to narrowly oblanceolate, 1–6(–9) mm wide, ± equally gray-green pubescent on
   both surfaces, not bicolored; basal leaves absent at flowering time                                       G. falcata

Gamochaeta falcata (Lam.) Cabrera, (falcate, sickle-shaped). Annual similar to G. purpurea; in-
volucres 4–6 mm high. Sandy or rocky ground; Burnet, Denton, Fannin, and Palo Pinto cos.; se
and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun. Native of se South America. [Gnaphalium
falcatum Lam.] I

Gamochaeta pensylvanica (Willd.) Cabrera, (of Pennsylvania), CUDWEED. Annual or biennial;
stems 10–40 cm tall; similar to G. purpurea; leaves weakly bicolored; inflorescences usually in-
terrupted; involucres 3–5 mm high. Sandy roadsides, fields, and woods; se and e TX w to West
Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun. [Gnaphalium pensylvanicum Willd.,
Gnaphalium peregrinum Fernald]

Gamochaeta purpurea (L.) Cabrera, (purple), PURPLE CUDWEED. Annual; stems 10–30 cm tall;
leaves strongly bicolored; inflorescences usually continuous; involucres 4–6 mm high. Sandy
360   ASTERACEAE/GRINDELIA

woods and roadsides; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau Apr–May.
[Gnaphalium purpureum L.]

            GRINDELIA GUMWEED, TARWEED, ROSINWEED, GUMPLANT
Annual to perennial herbs, usually glutinous; leaves alternate, simple, sessile, serrate to spiny-
toothed; receptacles naked; phyllaries linear to linear-subulate; ray flowers 0–45, pistillate, fer-
tile, the corollas yellow; disk flowers perfect, the central sometimes sterile, the peripheral fertile,
the corollas yellow; achenes glabrous; pappus similar, of 2–numerous bristles or awns.

AA genus of ca. 55 species of w North America and South America; some are used as culti-
vated ornamentals and others as medicinal herbs. We are following Nesom et al. (1993), Jones et
al. (1997), and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in including the monotypic genus Prionopsis; ac-
cording to Nesom et al. (1993), the only morphological character distinguishing the genera is a
difference in the pappus; molecular data (Suh 1989) indicated that Grindelia is paraphyletic
when Prionopsis is excluded. However, while noting that Grindelia and Prionopsis are sister
groups in all of their analyses including molecular data, Lane and Hartman (1996) indicated
there are other morphological characters separating the two and that other genera should pos-
sibly be included in the clade. They stated, “… we believe the distinct status of these genera
should be maintained until data are obtained that unequivocally support one or another of the
possible mergers.” (Named for professor David Hieronymus Grindel, 1776–1836, a European
botanist from Riga) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Hall 1928; Steyermark 1934; Suh 1989; Nesom 1990c, 1992b; Nesom et al. 1993.

1. Ray flowers absent                                                                                           G. nuda
1. Ray flowers present.
   2. Pappus bristles numerous per achene, united in a ring at base, ± persistent but upon full ma-
      turity falling as a unit or in groups                                                                 G. papposa
   2. Pappus bristles or awns only 2–8 per achene, not united at base, falling off at the slightest
      touch.
      3. Middle stem leaves oblong, with 13–30 teeth per side; upper part of phyllaries usually spread-
         ing to squarrose (= spreading rigidly at right angle or more) to reflexed; rare in nc TX          G. squarrosa
      3. Middle stem leaves lanceolate to deltoid, with 7–15 teeth per side OR oblong, with 25–60
         small teeth per side; upper part of phyllaries ascending to spreading, but neither squarrose
         nor reflexed; wide-spread in nc TX.
         4. Middle stem leaves lanceolate to deltoid, with 7–15 teeth per side; plants perennial          G. lanceolata
         4. Middle stem leaves oblong, with 25–60 teeth per side; plants annual                         G. adenodonta

Grindelia adenodonta (Steyerm.) G.L. Nesom, (sticky tooth), LITTLE-HEAD GUMWEED, GLAND-
TOOTH GUMWEED. Taprooted annual 1–1.5 m tall, glandular pubescence usually absent; leaves
not much reduced towards the heads; mature achenes ca. as broad as long. Clay soils; se and s
TX n to nc TX and w to Edwards Plateau. Jun–Nov. While often recognized as [G. microcephala
DC. var. adenodonta Steyerm.] (e.g., Kartesz 1994), we are following Nesom (1992b), Jones et al.
(1997) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in recognizing it at the specific level.

Grindelia lanceolata Nutt., (lanceolate, lance-shaped), GULF GUMWEED. Biennial or perennial
from woody crown; stems 0.3–1.5 m tall; leaves 4–10 cm long, 1–3 cm wide, tapered to apex,
gradually reduced towards the heads; ray flowers 20–30, the ligules ca. 10–16 mm long; achenes
longer than broad, 2–5 mm long. Calcareous soils; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards
Plateau. Summer(–fall).

Grindelia nuda A.W. Wood, (nude), RAYLESS GUMWEED. Similar to and sometimes treated as a
variety of G. squarrosa; taprooted annual; leaves gradually reduced towards the heads; middle
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS    361




  Gaillardia pulchella [JON]              Gaillardia suavis [BB2]                   Gamochaeta falcata [HEA]




Gamochaeta pensylvanica [HEA]   Gamochaeta purpurea [MAR , SM1]                   Grindelia adenodonta [AMB]




Grindelia lanceolata [BB2]             Grindelia nuda [HEA]                           Grindelia papposa [HAL]
362   ASTERACEAE/GUTIERREZIA

stem leaves oblong, with 13–30 teeth per side; phyllaries usually spreading to squarrose or re-
flexed; achenes oblong, longer than broad, 2.3–3 mm long. Disturbed areas; widespread in n and
w parts of TX, most frequent in Plains Country. Summer–fall. [G. squarrosa (Pursh) Dunal var.
nuda (A.W. Wood) A. Gray]

Grindelia papposa G.L. Nesom & Y.B. Suh, (named for its conspicuous pappus), SAW-LEAF DAISY,
GOLDENWEED. Stout annual, glabrous, resinous-glandular; stems 0.5–1.5+ m tall, usually un-
branched except near top; leaves oblong, to 5 cm long and 1 cm wide, coarsely spiny-toothed;
heads few, terminating the branches; receptacles 10–30 mm wide; involucres 10–15 mm high;
ray flowers ca. 45, the ligules 10–13 mm long. Disturbed areas; widespread in TX. Aug–Sep. Pre-
viously recognized in the monotypic genus Prionopsis [as P. ciliata (Nutt.) Nutt.]. [Haplopappus
ciliatus (Nutt.) DC., not Grindelia ciliata Spreng.] Avoided by grazing livestock. m/91

Grindelia squarrosa (Pursh) Dunal, (with recurved tips), CURLY-CUP GUMWEED. Taprooted annual
or biennial 0.1–1 m tall; leaves gradually reduced towards the heads; achenes longer than broad,
2.3–3 mm long. Open or disturbed areas; Clay, Montague, Tarrant, and Wise cos., also Brown,
Hamilton, and Mills cos. (HPC); also Plains Country. Summer–fall. Used medicinally by Native
Americans and in folk remedies; however, it contains the carcinogen, safrole (Duke 1985). 9

                          GUTIERREZIA BROOMWEED, SNAKEWEED
Annuals or perennials, herbaceous or woody, often glutinous (with a gluey or sticky exudate);
leaves alternate, essentially sessile, linear to narrowly lanceolate or narrowly elliptical, entire;
inflorescences paniculate or corymbose; phyllaries in several series, usually green-tipped; ray
flowers pistillate, fertile or sterile, the corollas yellow; disk flowers perfect, fertile or sterile, the
corollas yellow; pappus absent, of scales, or a low crown.

AA genus of 27 species (number depending on circumscription) of w North America and
warm South America. The species treated here have been variously placed in Amphiachyris,
Gutierrezia , and Xanthocephalum. Shinners (1951c), Correll and Johnston (1970), and Mahler
(1988) placed all in Xanthocephalum. Based on chromosome number and morphological data,
Gutierrezia (including Amphiachyris) (x = 4 or 5) appears more closely related to a number of
other genera than to Xanthocephalum sensu stricto (x = 6) (Lane 1982). Molecular data (Suh &
Simpson 1990) also showed that Gutierrezia is not closely related to Xanthocephalum (which
is more closely related to Grindelia ). Lane (1979, 1982) argued that G. amoena and G.
dracunculoides should be segregated into the genus Amphiachyris. We, however, follow Barkley
(1986) and Taylor (1997) in not segregating Amphiachyris from Gutierrezia. The molecular
analysis of Suh and Simpson (1990) indicated that the 2 species sometimes segregated as
Amphiachyris form a sister group (with 1 other species–G. triflora which is sometimes put in
the monotypic genus Thurovia) to the rest of Gutierrezia . Therefore, Amphiachyris (and
Thurovia) can be either lumped with Gutierrezia or split depending on other considerations.
Because of striking morphological similarity and because Gutierrezia is still monophyletic
with the inclusion of these three species, the recognition of one monotypic genus (Thurovia)
and a second genus with only 2 species (Amphiachyris) does not seem justified. 9 Several spe-
cies are toxic to grazing livestock due to saponins or unknown toxins (Kingsbury 1964; James
& Welsh 1992); they increase under overgrazing. (Named in 1816 for Pedro Gutierrez, correspon-
dent of the botanical garden of Madrid) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1951c; Solbrig 1960, 1961; Ruffin 1974; Lane 1979, 1980, 1982, 1985; Barkley
1986; Suh & Simpson 1990; Nesom 1991c.

1. Heads campanulate, about as long as broad, with 7–15 ray flowers; annuals with stems typically
   branching from ca. the middle upward; widespread in nc TX.
   2. Disk flowers sterile (staminate), not producing achenes; disk pappus usually of 5 long, narrowly
                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        363




   Grindelia squarrosa [KIN]     Gutierrezia dracunculoides [REE, SID]




  Gutierrezia amoena [SID]           Gutierrezia sarothrae [BB2, SID]




                                                                                 RAY
                                                                                 FLOWER




                                                                        DISK
                                                                        FLOWER




Gutierrezia microcephala [IPL]    Gutierrezia sphaerocephala [HEA]
364   ASTERACEAE/GUTIERREZIA

      spatulate scales as long as or longer than the corollas, united from base to ca. 1/4 their length;
      ray pappus of several acute scales; phyllaries appear ± without nerves, varnished, shining.
      3. Plants 30–40(–60) cm tall; heads scattered in open panicles; achenes long setulose; sta-
         mens included; leaves 0.2–1(–2) mm wide; receptacles with hooked, swollen-based hairs;
         mainly s 1/2 of nc TX                                                                              G. amoena
      3. Plants 30–100 cm or more tall; heads many to very numerous in crowded corymbs; achenes
         short setulose; stamens exerted; leaves 0.5–6 mm wide; receptacles glabrous; throughout
         nc TX                                                                                       G. dracunculoides
   2. Disk flowers fertile, producing achenes; disk pappus of several short pointed scales usually <
      1/2 as long as the corollas; ray pappus greatly reduced or nearly absent; phyllaries appear
      nervate (1 or 3 nerves), neither varnished nor shining.
      4. Pappus of ray flowers inconspicuous to absent; disk flowers 7–13 per head; achenes pu-
         berulent by short purplish hairs, the achene surface not concealed; widespread in nc TX
                                                                                                               G. texana
      4. Pappus of ray flowers of small scales; disk flowers 18–37 per head; achenes densely long
         pubescent by white hairs, the achene surface concealed; a w TX species possibly occurring
         as far e as w margin of nc TX                                                              G. sphaerocephala
1. Heads ± cylindrical, longer than broad, with 1–7(–8) ray flowers; perennials with stems usually
   branching from the base upwards; extreme w part of nc TX.
   5. Ray flowers (2–)3–5(–8) per head; disk flowers (2–)3–5(–9) per head, producing achenes; in-
      volucres 3–6 mm high; phyllaries 8–14(–21)                                                           G. sarothrae
   5. Ray flowers 1 (very rarely 2) per head; disk flowers 1 (very rarely 2) per head, not producing
      achenes; involucres 2–4 mm high; phyllaries 4–6(–8)                                              G. microcephala

Gutierrezia amoena (Shinners) Diggs, Lipscomb, & O’Kennon, comb. nov. BASIONYM :
Xanthocephalum amoenum Shinners, Field & Lab. 19:77. 1951. TYPE: TEXAS. Comal Co.: rocky
prairies of the Guadaloupe, north of New Braunfels, 1846, Lindheimer 422, (HOLOTYPE: BRIT/
SMU), (charming), ANNUAL BROOMWEED, BROOMWEED. Main stem usually 5 mm or less in diam.;
leaves linear (rarely linear-lanceolate), 0.5–2.5(–3.5) cm long, 0.2–1(–2) mm wide; phyllaries to
3–4 mm long and 1–2 mm wide; achenes 2–3 mm long, purple-black with 4–6 greenish stripes.
Calcareous soils on or near limestone outcrops; c to nc TX and the w part of e TX. Late Sep–Oct.
[Amphiachyris amoena (Shinners) Solbrig, Xanthocephalum amoenum Shinners, X. amoenum
var. intermedium Shinners]

Gutierrezia dracunculoides (DC.) S.F. Blake, (resembling Artemisia dracunculus L.—taragon),
COMMON BROOMWEED. Main stem 0.3–1(–2) cm in diam.; leaves narrowly to broadly lanceolate,
0.5–6 cm long, 0.5–6 mm wide; phyllaries to 2–3 mm long and 1–2 mm wide; achenes 1.2–2.2
mm long, purple-black with 7–9 greenish stripes. Calcareous, clay or sandy soils, disturbed
habitats, often in large populations particularly in overgrazed areas; nearly throughout TX. Jul–
Nov. [Amphiachyris dracunculoides (DC.) Nutt., Xanthocephalum dracunculoides (DC.)
Shinners] This species can cause contact dermatitis in humans, eye inflamation in humans and
livestock, and gastrointestinal upsets in cattle (Gates 1945; Ajilvsgi 1984). The plants were tied
to sticks by early settlers and used as brooms (Ajilvsgi 1984). 9

Gutierrezia microcephala (DC.) A. Gray, (small-headed), THREAD-LEAF SNAKEWEED. Much
branched subshrub 0.3–1 m tall; leaves linear, 1–4 mm wide; pappus of disk flowers of several
acute scales; pappus of ray flowers similar but shorter. Open sandy or limestone soils; included
based on citation of vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly w 1/2 of TX, pos-
sibly e as far as w margin of nc TX (Lane 1985). Jul–Oct. [Xanthocephalum microcephalum
(DC.) Shinners] This species causes poisoning and abortion in sheep and cattle apparently due
to the presence of saponins; this has resulted in significant economic losses in w TX
                                                                        HEDYPNOIS/ASTERACEAE    365

(Kingsbury 1964); symptoms include loss of appetite, dropping of the head, and hematuria
(Burlage 1968); in w TX this species is an indicator of overgrazed range conditions (Powell 1988). 9

Gutierrezia sarothrae (Pursh) Britton & Rusby, (thought by Pursh to resemble Hypericum
sarothra Michx.), BROOM SNAKEWEED, PERENNIAL BROOMWEED, MATCHWEED, MATCHBRUSH, KIN-
DLING -WEED, YERBA DE VÍBORA, TURPENTINE-WEED, ESCOBA DE LA VÍBORA. Woody-based sub-
shrub 0.2–1 m tall; leaves linear, entire; involucres 1–3 mm broad; ray flowers with pappus of
linear, obtuse scales; disk flowers with pappus of acute scales about twice the length of the ray
pappus scales. Open or disturbed sites, often calcareous soils; Brown, Callahan, Erath,
Montague, and Young cos.; w part of nc TX s and w to w TX, also se TX. Jul–Nov. [Xanthocepha-
lum sarothrae (Pursh) Shinners] This species is an indicator of overgrazing; a number of com-
mon names refer to the highly flammable nature of the dried stems which were used histori-
cally in starting fires (Ajilvsgi 1984). This species causes toxicity to livestock, as in G.
microcephala, due to saponins or unknown toxins (Kingsbury 1964; James & Welsh 1992). It is
reported to contain a protein with antitumor activity (Mabberley 1997). 9

Gutierrezia sphaerocephala A. Gray, (spherical-headed), ROUND -HEAD BROOMWEED ,
ROUNDLEAF. Stems to 0.6 m tall, much branched above; leaves linear, 2–3 mm wide; involucres
about 3–5 mm long; achenes densely white pubescent on ribs; pappus of disk flowers of several
scales; pappus of ray flowers similar but shorter. Disturbed habitats; included by Mahler (1988)
for nc TX; we can find no specimens or other citations for nc TX and according to Lane (1985)
this species occurs only far to the w of nc TX; w 1/2 of TX. Jul–Nov. [Xanthocephalum
sphaerocephalum (A. Gray) Shinners]

Guterrezia texana (DC.) Torr. & A. Gray, (of Texas), TEXAS BROOMWEED, KINDLING-WEED. Stems
0.1–0.8 m high; much branched above; leaves linear, 0.6–2(–5) mm wide; involucres ca. 2.5–4
mm long; ray flowers 10–15; pappus of disk flowers of acute scales. Disturbed habitats; se and e
TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Jul–Nov. [Xanthocephalum texanum (DC.)
Shinners]

                                         HEDYPNOIS
AA genus of 2 species native from Macaronesia to Iran. (Greek name used by Pliny for a kind
of wild endive) (tribe Latuceae)
REFERENCE: Sell 1976.

Hedypnois cretica (L.) Dum.Cours., (of Crete). Taprooted annual, ± hairy; stems spreading and
ascending, 10–30 cm long, sparingly branched; leaves alternate; basal leaves pinnately lobed,
usually with winged petioles; stem leaves few, reduced, sessile; heads solitary at the branch tips;
involucres ca. 10 mm high; inner phyllaries scabrous-hispid, after flowering becoming con-
spicuously curved and boat-shaped (with a very rounded keel); outer phyllaries < 1/2 as long as
inner; inner phyllaries strongly incurved in fruit; flowers perfect, mostly fertile; corollas all
ligulate, yellow, with 5 purple teeth; achenes ca. 5–7.5 mm long, ± cylindrical, beakless, the outer
achenes incurved; pappus of outer achenes a crown ca. 1 mm long, that of inner achenes of sev-
eral bristle-like scales ca. 5 mm long. Sandy or rocky soils, roadsides; included based on citation
of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), probably only to the se of nc TX. Mar–Apr.
Native of Mediterranean region, Canary Islands. (Cichorieae) I

                       HELENIUM SNEEZEWEED, BITTERWEED
Annual or perennial herbs, glabrous or pubescent; leaves alternate, entire to deeply and finely
lobed, resin-dotted; heads terminal, solitary or corymbose; phyllaries few, herbaceous, loosely
spreading or reflexed; heads usually radiate; ray flowers with ligules widened and 3-toothed
366   ASTERACEAE/HELENIUM

apically, yellow to brown-red, often reflexed; disks ovoid or globose; disk corollas yellow to
brown-red; pappus of 5–7 scales elongated into an awn-like tip.

AAn American genus of 40 species including some cultivated ornamentals. 9 Most species
are poisonous and unpalatable to grazing animals (Barkley 1986); some contain sesquiterpene
lactones (e.g., helenalin) or a glycoside (Blackwell 1990; Hardin & Brownie 1993). (Greek:
helenion, the name of another plant said by Linnaeus to be named after Helen of Troy, wife of
King Menelaus of Sparta) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes lumped into Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Rock 1957; Bierner 1972, 1989; Stanford & Turner 1988.

1. Leaves linear to lanceolate, elliptic, or oblong, usually > 2 mm wide, decurrent (= leaf tissue ex-
   tending down the stem), the stems thus winged.
   2. Perennials with fibrous roots from subrhizomatous base; disk corollas completely yellow; ray
      flowers with ligules completely yellow                                                            H. autumnale
   2. Annuals with taproot; disk corollas with lobes reddish brown or yellowish brown; ray flowers
      with ligules completely yellow or yellow with reddish brown basal blotch.
      3. Ray flowers with ligules 3–11.5 mm long, yellow, often with reddish brown basal blotch;
         upper stem leaves linear, reduced, entire; heads peduncled, well above the foliage                 H. elegans
      3. Ray flowers with ligules 2–3(–5) mm long, completely yellow; upper stem leaves ovate to
         oblong, little reduced, often with at least some teeth; heads short-peduncled, barely
         above the foliage                                                                         H. microcephalum
1. Leaves or leaf segments linear to thread-like, usually < 2 mm wide, not decurrent, the stems thus
   unwinged                                                                                                H. amarum

Helenium amarum (Raf.) H. Rock, (bitter). Annual; plant 10–85 cm tall; leaves all linear or fili-
form except for lowest which are sometimes pinnatifid (these sometimes withered before flow-
ering time); ray flowers ca. 10, with ligules yellow, 5–10 mm long. Open woods, fields, pastures,
and disturbed areas. The following two varieties have often been recognized as species; Stanford
and Turner (1988) discussed their relationship.

1. Disk corollas yellow with lobes yellow to yellow-brown; lower and basal leaves typically
   withered at flowering time; basal leaves entire to toothed to occasionally pinnatifid                var. amarum
1. Disk corollas yellow with lobes reddish brown or purple; lower and basal leaves sometimes
   withered at flowering time or often present; basal leaves pinnatifid                                  var. badium

var. amarum, BITTERWEED. Se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau, mostly e of
100th meridian. May–Nov. The foliage is extremely bitter, largely avoided by livestock, and thus
greatly increasing under conditions of overgrazing; conspicuously dominant on abused pas-
tures. May–Nov. [H. tenuifoliumNutt.] All parts of the plant contain the glycoside dugaldin and
cause toxic symptons in animals; cows that have eaten even small amounts of the plant pro-
duce extremely bitter, distasteful milk; honey made from the flowers is also reportedly bitter
(Correll & Johnston 1970; Stephens 1980; Ajilvsgi 1984). 9

var. badium (A. Gray ex S. Watson) Waterfall, (reddish brown), BASIN SNEEZEWEED. Similar to va-
riety amarum except for the characters in the key. Dallas and Grayson cos. w and sw to w TX.
Apr–Jul, sporadically to Oct. [H. badium (A. Gray) Greene]

Helenium autumnale L., (of autumn), COMMON SNEEZEWEED, TALL SNEEZEWEED, STAGGERWORT,
SWAMP-SUNFLOWER. Stems to 1(–2) m tall; leaves linear-elliptic; ray flowers ca. 20, with corollas
to 15 mm long. Low, moist, calcareous soils; Tarrant County; also e TX, Rolling Plains, and
Edwards Plateau. Aug–Oct. Poisonous to cattle and sheep; it is reported to cause “spewing sick-
ness” with symptoms including weakness, depression, vomiting, excessive salivation, frothing,
irregular pulse, and kidney and liver damage (Burlage 1968). 9
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       367




       Gutierrezia texana [SID]




                                                        Hedypnois cretica [HEA]



Helenium amarum var. amarum [REE]




                                    Helenium elegans [BT3]



    Helenium autumnale [GWO]                                                  Helenium microcephalum [HEA]
368    ASTERACEAE/HELIANTHUS

Helenium elegans DC., (elegant). Plant 20–120 cm tall; leaves narrowly elliptic to lanceolate or
linear. Gravelly stream bottoms or seepy slopes on limestone; Dallas and Grayson cos. s and sw
to Edwards Plateau. May–Jul.

Helenium microcephalum DC., (small-headed), SMALL-HEAD SNEEZEWEED, SMALL SNEEZEWEED,
SNEEZEWEED. Plant 10–120 cm tall; leaves narrowly elliptic to narrowly oblong-elliptic. Sandy
or silty ground, dried-up ponds, and fields; West Cross Timbers and Lampasas Cut Plain s and
w to w TX. Jun–Jul.

                                       HELIANTHUS SUNFLOWER
Annuals or perennials, herbaceous; leaves sessile or petioled, alternate, opposite, or opposite be-
low and alternate above; heads sessile or peduncled; phyllaries in several series; ray flowers pis-
tillate, infertile (not producing mature achenes), the corollas yellow; disk flowers perfect, fertile,
the corollas reddish purple or yellow, producing mature achenes that are compressed laterally
but not thin-edged; pappus of 2 awns, readily falling.

AA North American genus of 50 species including the widely cultivated SUNFLOWER, H.
annuus. Species of this genus are often confused with those of Silphium; however, in Silphium the
ray flowers produce mature achenes (disk flowers do not), while in Helianthus the disk flowers
produce mature achenes (ray flowers do not). (Greek: helios, the sun, and anthos, flower, pre-
sumably in reference to the turning of the inflorescences towards the sun) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Heiser 1951, 1954; Jackson 1963; Heiser et al. 1969; Rogers et al. 1982; Sims & Price
1985; Chandler et al. 1986; Rieseberg et al. 1991.

1. Foliage blue-green glaucous; leaf margins and phyllaries ciliate; perennial with long, slender
   rhizomes; leaves almost all opposite; plants usually 0.7 m or less tall                                     H. ciliaris
1. Foliage not blue-green glaucous; plants without the above combination.
   2. Leaf blades narrowed to a distinct petiole (sometimes as short as 5 mm, often much longer),
      entire to conspicuously toothed.
      3. Annuals with taproot.
         4. Larger leaves 10–30 cm wide; plants often 1.5–4 m tall; phyllaries conspicuously long
            ciliate marginally, 4–7(–10) mm wide, ± abruptly contracted near apex; peduncles with
            wide-spreading hairs                                                                              H. annuus
         4. Larger leaves 2–10 cm wide; plants 0.4–2 m tall; phyllaries scabrous, not marginally ciliate,
            4 mm or less wide, ± gradually tapered to apex; peduncles with appressed or ascending
            hairs.
            5. Leaf blades usually entire, sometimes serrate, cuneate to truncate at base; pales (=
               bracts on receptacle) in center of head with tips densely white-bearded; w Blackland
               Prairie                                                                                      H. petiolaris
            5. Leaf blades usually serrate, rarely entire, cuneate to truncate or often cordate at base;
               pales in center of head with tips hispid or slightly villous; extreme e margin of nc TX
                                                                                                              H. debilis
      3. Perennials with erect crowns and/or tough creeping rootstocks or rhizomes.
         6. Stems glabrous, glaucous; leaf blades not or only slightly scabrous above                H. grosseserratus
         6. Stems pubescent; leaf blades usually conspicuously scabrous above.
            7. Phyllaries with tips ± tightly appressed and clearly imbricate in several series of very
               different lengths; disk corollas with reddish brown or reddish purple lobes
                                                                                                         H. pauciflorus
            7. Phyllaries with the tips loose-spreading and all about the same length; disk corollas
               totally yellow.
               8. Upper leaves alternate; petioles winged, 4–9 cm long; leaf blades 60–150 mm wide        H. tuberosus
                                                                                    HELIANTHUS/ASTERACEAE         369

             8. Leaves mostly opposite; petioles unwinged, 0.5–2 cm long; leaf blades 7–70 mm
                wide                                                                                        H. hirsutus
  2. Leaf blades sessile, without a distinct petiole, entire or with small inconspicuous teeth.
     9. Leaf blades very narrow, linear to linear-lanceolate, 2–10(–12) mm wide; disk corollas with
        reddish brown or reddish purple lobes                                                           H. salicifolius
     9. Leaf blades usually much broader, 20–60(–90) mm wide; disk corollas with yellow OR red-
        dish brown or reddish purple lobes.
        10. Phyllaries with tips ± tightly appressed and clearly imbricate in several series of very
            different lengths; disk corollas with reddish brown or reddish purple lobes; leaves mostly
            opposite, not clasping                                                                      H. pauciflorus
        10. Phyllaries with the tips loose-spreading and all about the same length; disk corollas
            totally yellow; leaves either alternate or if opposite then cordate clasping.
            11. Leaves alternate, not clasping, the blades narrowly elliptic, some or all folded
                lengthwise; flowering mostly Sep–Oct                                                  H. maximiliani
            11. Leaves mostly opposite, mostly cordate-clasping, the blades ovate to ovate-lanceolate,
                all flat; flowering Jun–Sep                                                                  H. mollis

Helianthus annuus L., (annual), COMMON SUNFLOWER, MIRASOL. Extremely variable in size, flow-
ering when as little as 10 cm tall or as much as 4 m; leaf blades triangular-ovate to ovate-lan-
ceolate, mostly alternate but lowermost opposite, truncate to cordate at base; ray corollas deep
yellow, disk corollas brown-red (rarely dark yellow); achenes glabrous or pubescent. Stream bot-
toms, roadsides, disturbed areas; throughout TX. May–Oct. [H. annuus subsp. lenticularis (Dou-
glas ex Lindl.) Cockerell, H. annuus subsp. texanus Heiser] The cultivated SUNFLOWER, widely
grown for the seeds, for oil, and as an ornamental, is derived from H. annuus; it is one of the world’s
most important oil crops (Mabberley 1987; Rieseberg & Seiler 1990). Achenes of H. annuus were
gathered as food by Native Americans of the w U.S. (Heiser 1951) and the species was being cul-
tivated in parts of North America when Europeans arrived (Heiser 1993); it is one of the few
agricultural plants to originate in North America north of Mexico (Nabhan 1979). m/91

Helianthus ciliaris DC., (ciliate, fringed with hairs), BLUE-WEED SUNFLOWER, BLUEWEED, TEXAS
BLUEWEED. Perennial from slender rhizomes; foliage blue-green glaucous; stems 0.3–0.7 m tall,
glabrous or nearly so; leaves mostly opposite, sessile or short petiolate; leaf blades narrowly to
broadly lanceolate, usually 0.5–2(+) cm wide; ray flowers 10–18, the ligules ca. 10 mm long or
sometimes absent; disk flowers reddish or with reddish lobes; achenes ca. 3 mm long. Sandy or
sandy clay soils; Denton, Tarrant, and Young cos., also Brown Co. (HPC); w 2/3 of TX, mainly w
of nc TX. Jun–Sep.

Helianthus debilis Nutt. subsp. cucumerifolius (Torr. & A. Gray) Heiser, (sp.: weak, frail; subsp.:
with leaves like Cucumis—cucumber), CUCUMBER-LEAF SUNFLOWER. Stems usually 0.55–0.65 m
tall; leaves ± all alternate; leaf blades deltoid-ovate to deltoid-lanceolate, cuneate to truncate or
often cordate at base, 3–8 cm wide, usually regularly serrate, rarely entire; petioles ca. as long as
blades; ray flowers with ligules ca. 20 mm long; disk corollas with deep red-purple lobes. Sandy
soils; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se
TX, but at least as far n as Travis Co. (Correll & Johnston 1970) just s of nc TX. Late summer–
fall. [H. cucumerifoliusTorr. & A. Gray]

Helianthus grosseserratus M. Martens, (large-toothed), SAW-TOOTH SUNFLOWER. Stems 1–3(–5) m
tall, glabrous, glaucous; leaves mostly alternate; leaf blades narrowly ovate, prominently ser-
rate; petioles about 8 cm long mid-stem; ray flowers with ligules ca. 25–40 mm long, yellow;
disk corollas yellow; achenes glabrous, about 5 mm long. Wooded stream bottoms; Cooke, Dal-
las, Fannin, and Lamar cos., also Collin Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); in TX mainly nc part of
state, also rare in Edwards Plateau (Gillespie Co.) and sc TX (Gonzales Co.). Oct.
370   ASTERACEAE/HELIANTHUS

Helianthus hirsutus Raf., (hairy), HAIRY SUNFLOWER, STIFF-HAIR SUNFLOWER. Stems 0.5–1.7 m tall;
leaves opposite; leaf blades lanceolate to narrowly ovate or ovate, serrate to rarely entire; peti-
oles 5–20 mm long; ray and disk corollas completely yellow; ray flowers with ligules ca. 15–25
mm long; achenes glabrous. Sandy open woods, forest margins; se and e TX w to West Cross
Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Aug.

Helianthus maximiliani Schrad., (for its discoverer, Prince Maximilian von Wied-Neuwied,
1782–1867, German botanist and traveler in Brazil and North America), MAXIMILIAN SUN-
FLOWER, MICHAELMAS DAISY. Perennial, sometimes forming extensive colonies; stems 0.3–3 m
tall; leaves alternate, often conspicuously folded and sickle-shaped; heads few to numerous in a
spike-like or raceme-like arrangement; ray flowers with ligules ca. (15–)25–35(–40) mm long,
yellow; disk corollas yellow; achenes 3–4 mm long. Low moist areas, roadsides, prairies; one of
the most abundant sunflowers in nc TX; widespread in TX. Mostly Sep–Oct. m/91

Helianthus mollis Lam., (soft hairy), ASHY SUNFLOWER, HAIRY SUNFLOWER, DOWNY SUNFLOWER.
Perennial; stems 0.5–1 m tall, hirsute to villous; leaves mostly opposite, ovate-lanceolate to
broadly ovate, sessile, usually cordate-clasping, grayish green in appearance; heads solitary or
in spike-like racemes; ray and disk corollas completely yellow; ray flowers with ligules to ca. 30
mm long; achenes ca. 4 mm long. Sandy, wooded or open areas; Cooke, Grayson, and Tarrant
cos; se and e TX w to nc TX. Jun–Sep.

Helianthus pauciflorus Nutt., (few-flowered), STIFF SUNFLOWER. Perennial; stems 0.8–2 m tall;
leaves nearly all opposite; leaf blades oblong-lanceolate to lance-ovate, acuminate, subsessile or
with winged petiolar base; ray flowers with ligules yellow, sometimes with reddish tinge on
back near apex, ca. 20–35 mm long. Prairies or open woods, often on sand; mainly se and e TX
disjunct w to Cooke, Montague, and Wise cos., also a report from Hunt Co. (Clymer Meadow—J.
Eidson, pers. comm.). Aug–Oct. [H. laetiflorusPers. var. rigidus (Cass.) Fernald; H. rigidus (Cass.) Desf.]

Helianthus petiolaris Nutt., (with a petiole or leaf stalk), PLAINS SUNFLOWER, PRAIRIE SUNFLOWER.
Stems 0.5–2 m tall; leaves alternate; leaf blades triangular-ovate to narrowly ovate; petioles 1–15
cm long, nearly as long as the blades; heads paniculate, pedunculate; ray flowers with ligules ca.
20 mm long; disk corollas usually with red-purple lobes; achenes 3.5–4.5 mm long, villous.
Sandy or rocky prairies; Dallas and McLennan cos. s and w to w TX. May–Oct. Known to hy-
bridize with H. annuus.

Helianthus salicifolius A. Dietr., (with leaves like Salix—willow), WILLOW-LEAF SUNFLOWER. Pe-
rennial; stems 0.4–2 m tall, glabrous; leaves alternate, crowded, usually conspicuously linear to
linear-lanceolate; disk corollas with red-purple or reddish brown lobes; ray flowers with ligules
ca. 10–20(–30) mm long; achenes 4–6 mm long, glabrous. Calcareous soils, prairies; Cooke, Dal-
las, Grayson, Hill, and Montague cos.; nc TX w to e Rolling Plains and s to Edwards Plateau.
Jun–Oct.

Helianthus tuberosus L., (tuberous), JERUSALEM-ARTICHOKE, GIRASOLE. Rhizomes slender with
tuberous thickenings at ends; stems 1–3 m tall; leaves opposite below, alternate above; leaf
blades ovate, 10–25 cm long; petioles winged, 4–9 cm long; ray and disk corollas yellow; ray
flowers with ligules ca. 25–40 mm long; achenes 5–7 mm long, glabrous. Wooded areas; Dallas
and Grayson cos.; in TX only in the nc part of the state. Aug–Oct. Cultivated for the edible tu-
bers which are sweet (partly due to the presence of fructose and thus reported to be a useful
carbohydrate source for diabetics since fructose is sweeter on a molar basis than glucose); used
as a food by Native Americans (Mabberley 1997).

Helianthus simulans E. Watson, (resembling), a rhizomatous perennial with rhizomes 5–10 cm
long, to 1 cm thick, alternate (± opposite in small individuals), ± sessile, non-folded leaves, and
yellow or purple-tipped disk corollas, has been cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area
                                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS          371




                                                                                                        Helianthus ciliaris [ CO1]




                               Helianthus annuus [BT3]                                       Helianthus debilis subsp. cucumerifolius [MTB]




Helianthus grosseserratus [GLE , MTB]                    Helianthus hirsutus [BB2]                   Helianthus maximiliani [STE]
372   ASTERACEAE/HETEROTHECA

4 (Fig. 2) but apparently occurs only to the s and e of nc TX (Heiser et al. 1969). It is possibly of
hybrid origin (Heiser et al. 1969).

         HETEROTHECA GOLDEN-ASTER, GOLD-ASTER, CAMPHORWEED
Pubescent or pilose annual or perennial herbs, often aromatic; leaves alternate; heads solitary or
corymbose; phyllaries in several rows of unequal lengths, slender; ray flowers with ligules yel-
low, curling under at night or in age; disk corollas yellow; pappus of long, scabrous hairs, and an
outer row of inconspicuous, short, narrow scales, or pappus absent from ray flowers.

AA s North American genus of 25 species. Chrysopsisis sometimes lumped into Heterotheca
(Mahler 1988). (Greek: heteros, different, and theca, case, alluding to the dissimilar ray and disk
achenes) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1951b; Wagenknecht 1960; Harms 1965, 1968; Vernon 1965; Semple 1977,
1996; Semple et al. 1980; Nesom 1991b.

1. Blades of upper and middle stem leaves little or not narrowed at base, sessile and slightly to
   strongly clasping, ovate; plants annual or biennial from taproot; commonly with a single stem
   from base; pappus of ray flowers absent                                                              H. subaxillaris
1. Blades of upper and middle stem leaves tapered to slender, petiole-like bases, not clasping, lin-
   ear to oblanceolate; plants perennial from tough woody base, often rhizomatous; stems usually
   clustered; pappus of ray flowers present.
   2. Leaf blades conspicuously gray in appearance, softly and densely pubescent, the hairs usually
      without swollen bases; leaf blades of flowering branches oblanceolate, 3–5 times as long as
      wide; foliage lacking resin glands or nearly so; widespread in w 1/2 of nc TX                      H. canescens
   2. Leaf blades distinctly green, bristly pubescent, the hairs usually with swollen bases (use lens);
      leaf blades of flowering branches usually ± linear, sometimes to linear-oblanceolate, mostly
      8–15 times as long as wide; foliage with abundant resin glands (use lens); on extreme w
      margin of nc TX                                                                                   H. stenophylla

Heterotheca canescens (DC.) Shinners, (grayish white), GRAY GOLD-ASTER. Perennial 15–60 cm
tall, older plants many-stemmed; leaves rather numerous and crowded, entire; ray flowers with
ligules 6–8 mm long. Sandy or gravelly prairies, rock outcrops; Panhandle to Trans-Pecos, e to
West Cross Timbers and Lampasas Cut Plain; also Tarrant Co. (Semple 1996) and collected at
Dallas by Reverchon. Jun–Oct. [Chrysopsiscanescens (DC.) Torr. & A. Gray]

Heterotheca stenophylla (A. Gray) Shinners, (narrow-leaved), NARROW-LEAF GOLD-ASTER. Peren-
nial 10–40 cm tall; ray flowers with ligules ca. 10 mm long. Sandy soils; Archer and Clay cos.,
also Burnet, Eastland (Semple 1996) and Erath (Harms 1968) cos.; w TX e to w boundary of nc
TX. Jun–Oct. [Chrysopsisvillosa (Pursh) Nutt. ex DC. var. stenophylla (A. Gray) A. Gray]

Heterotheca subaxillaris (Lam.) Britton & Rusby, (subaxillary), CAMPHORWEED, GOLDEN-ASTER,
CAMPHOR DAISY. Pilose and glandular-pubescent aromatic annual or biennial; stems 20–200 cm
tall. Spring form: dwarf, with long-petioled basal leaves, the blades coarsely toothed; stem
leaves short-petioled or sessile, the blades lanceolate, toothed, or entire. Summer form: taller, to 2
m by fall; lower leaves petioled, the petioles with enlarged, winged, clasping base; upper leaves
similar or varying to sessile, the blades auricled-clasping, oblong or ovate, slightly or coarsely
toothed; heads rather numerous; ray flowers with ligules ca. 5 mm long. Sandy or rocky ground,
open woods, fields, roadsides; throughout TX. Apr–Oct. [H. latifolia Buckley, H. subaxillaris var.
latifolia (Buckley) Gandhi & R.D. Thomas] The foliage has a strong camphor-like odor and the
plants are avoided by livestock (Ajilvsgi 1984).
                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        373




       Helianthus mollis [MTB]                                                    Helianthus petiolaris [MTB]




                                   Helianthus pauciflorus [MTB]




Helianthus salicifolius [MTB]                                                     Helianthus tuberosus [MTB]




Heterotheca canescens [STE]      Heterotheca stenophylla [UWA]                   Heterotheca subaxillaris [BB2]
374   ASTERACEAE/HIERACIUM

                                      HIERACIUM HAWKWEED
AA taxonomically complicated temperate and tropical montane genus of ca. 90 species (ca.
1,000 apomictic microspecies); the genus is related to Crepis. (Greek: herax, a hawk; the an-
cients, as recorded by Pliny and others, supposing that hawks ate these or similar plants to im-
prove their eyesight) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCE: Vuilleumier 1973.

Hieracium gronovii L., (for Jan Friedriech Gronovius 1690–1762, Dutch botanist at Leiden),
GRONOVIUS’ HAWKWEED. Perennial herb; sap milky; stems 0.4–1.5 m tall, naked for a consider-
able distance below the heads; leaves mostly in lower part of stem; leaf blades oblanceolate or
broadly elliptic, pilose with long brownish hairs (strikingly pilose in the field); inflorescences
leafless, corymbose or narrowly paniclulate, ± glandular-pubescent; heads small, 7–10 mm
long; flowers all ligulate; corollas yellow; achenes 2–4 mm long; pappus of bristles. Sandy
woods; Denton, Grayson, and Lamar cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. May–Jun(–fall).

                               HYMENOPAPPUS WOOLLY-WHITE
Ours biennial herbs; leaves basal (rosette) and cauline, alternate, the blades usually pinnatifid,
glandular-punctate, often conspicuously white hairy on lower surface; heads in corymb-like
arrangement, discoid; phyllaries in 2 or 3 series, petaloid apically, herbaceous basally; recep-
tacles naked; ray flowers (in our species) absent; disk flowers perfect, fertile; corollas white or
with reddish tinge (yellow in a species to the w of nc TX), the lobes becoming reflexed; anther
column long-exserted; achenes obconic, 4-angled, pubescent; pappus of 14–18 ovate to oblong
hyaline scales to 1.5(–2) mm long.

AA s North American genus of 14 species; some were used medicinally by Native Americans.
(Greek: hymen, membrane, and pappus, down, fuzz, pappus) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes
lumped into Heliantheae; Hymenopappuscan also be keyed using the Anthemidae key)
REFERENCES: Turner 1956; Rieseberg 1991.

1. Basal leaves with ultimate segments to 1.5 mm wide, elongate linear to filiform; corollas 2–3 mm
   long (to tips of corolla lobes), the corolla tubes 1.5–2(–2.2) mm long                             H. tenuifolius
1. Basal leaves with ultimate segments 2–20(–30) mm wide, variously shaped but wider than linear
   to filiform; corollas 3–5 mm long (to tips of corolla lobes), the corolla tubes 2–3 mm long.
   2. Flowers white or creamy white; basal leaves finely once-pinnately to bipinnately parted, the
      ultimate segments linear, 2–8 mm wide; usually on clay or limestone soils                     H. scabiosaeus
   2. Flowers reddish-tinged (rarely completely white); basal leaves simple to coarsely once-
      pinnately parted (rarely bipinnately parted), the ultimate segments broad, 6–30 mm wide;
      usually on sandy soils                                                                      H. artemisiifolius

Hymenopappus artemisiifolius DC., (with leaves like Artemisia —sagebrush or wormwood),
RAGWEED WOOLLY-WHITE, WOOLLY-WHITE, WILD CAULIFLOWER. Plant 0.4–1.3 m tall; corollas red-
dish-tinged (rarely completely white), 3.5–5 mm long; phyllaries 6–12 mm long, 3–7 mm wide,
white or tinged with red. Open woods, fields, disturbed areas; Denton, Henderson, Hill, Milam,
Tarrant, and Wise cos.; scattered in nc TX; mainly on sandy soils of se and e TX. Apr–Jun. [H.
scabiosaeus L’Her. var. artemisiifolius (DC.) Gandhi & R.D. Thomas]

Hymenopappus scabiosaeus L’Her. var. corymbosus (Torr. & A. Gray) B.L. Turner, (sp.: from Latin:
scabies, itch; var.: with flowers in corymbs), OLD-PLAINSMAN. Plant 0.4–1 m tall; phyllaries 5–9
mm long, 2–4 mm wide, with white or yellowish white tips 2-4 mm long; corollas white or
creamy white, 3–4 mm long. Prairies, open woods, roadsides; widespread in TX except for e TX
and Panhandle. Apr–May.
                                                                        HYMENOXYS/ASTERACEAE     375

Hymenopappus tenuifolius Pursh, (slender-leaved), CHALKHILL WOOLLY-WHITE, WOOLLY-WHITE,
OLD-PLAINSMAN. Plant 0.4–1.5 m tall; phyllaries 5–8 mm long, 2–4 mm wide, yellowish for 1–2
mm from tip; corollas white. Gravelly prairies, limestone outcrops or sandy soils; Bell and Dal-
las cos. w to Panhandle and s to sc TX. May–Jul.

HymenopappusflavescensA. Gray, (yellowish), with bright yellow corollas, occurs from w TX e
as far as Taylor Co., just w of nc TX.

                                HYMENOXYS BITTERWEED
A A genus of 17–28 species depending on circumscription; they are native from s North
America to Argentina; sometimes treated broadly to include Tetraneuris . A molecular study by
Bierner and Jansen (1998) supported the recognition of Tetraneuris as a separate genus. 9
Some contain sesquiterpene lactones toxic to sheep and goats; other species were formerly used
as chewing gum by Native Americans. (Greek: hymeno, membrane, and oxys, sharp, alluding to
the pointed pappus scales) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes lumped into Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Strother 1966; Bierner & Jansen 1998.

Hymenoxys odorata DC., (odorous), POISON BITTERWEED, WESTERN BITTERWEED, BITTERWEED, BIT-
TER RUBBERWEED. Inconspicuously pubescent, taprooted annual, 7–60 cm tall, becoming bushy-
branched when not crowded, forming rounded mounds; foliage aromatic when crushed; leaves
alternate, pinnately divided into 3–15 linear-filiform segments, minutely resin-dotted; heads
terminal, solitary or corymbose; ray flowers 6–13, the ligules deep yellow, widened and toothed
apically, ca. 5–11 mm long; disk corollas orange; pappus of 5(–6) acuminate or awn-tipped scales
1–2.3 mm long. Disturbed sites, becoming abundant in overgrazed areas; Archer Co., also Brown
Co. (Stanford 1971); w margin of nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr–Jun. Poisonous to livestock, espe-
cially to sheep under starvation conditions; the sesquiterpenes cause gastrointestinal irritation
and result in a wasting condition even after short periods of grazing; POISON BITTERWEED causes
considerable loss of livestock on ranges in the sw U.S. including the Edwards Plateau and has
been one of the main causes of the decline of sheep ranching in the sw U.S. (Kingsbury 1964;
James & Welsh 1992). 9

                                 HYPOCHAERIS CAT’S-EAR
Annual or perennial herbs with leaves basal or flowering stems with a few more or less well-
developed leaves, at least toward the base; leaf blades oblanceolate, toothed or pinnatifid; flowers
all ligulate; corollas yellow or in one species white; pappus, at least in part, of plumose bristles;
achenes all alike and beaked or of two kinds, the outermost beakless and the inner beaked.

AA genus of ca. 60 species native to Europe, Asia, n Africa, and especially South America; in-
cluding some weeds and cultivated ornamentals. The generic name has sometimes been
spelled Hypochoeris (e.g., Shinners 1966b; Tomb 1974; DeFilipps 1976), probably based on the
spelling by Linnaeus (1754) in Genera Plantarum . However, the accepted spelling is
Hypochaeris (Greuter et al. 1993), based on Linnaeus’ (1753) original spelling in Species
Plantarum . While not presently known from nc TX, 3 other species naturalized in the e and se
parts of TX are included below. They have been treated to alert collectors, and because of the
possibility that they will become part of the nc TX flora; their scientific names are in italics
rather than bold to indicate they are not currently known from nc TX. The following key is
modified from Shinners (1966b) and Cronquist (1980). (According to Vuilleumier (1973), Greek:
hypochoiris, used by Dioscorides for some plant, and also mentioned by Pliny as hypochoeris,
perhaps derived from hypo, for [or beneath], and choiros, pig, the animals being fond of its roots)
(tribe Lactuceae)
376   ASTERACEAE/IVA

REFERENCES: Shinners 1966b; Vuilleumier 1973; Tomb 1974; Cronquist 1980; Diggs et al. 1997.

1. Pappus bristles of 2 types: an outer series of short, merely barbellate bristles and an inner series
   of much longer, plumose bristles; flowering stems leafless or nearly so (at most with reduced
   leafy bracts abruptly much smaller than the numerous basal rosette leaves).
   2. Plants mostly annual, essentially glabrous; heads not very showy, the ligules about equaling
      the involucre and only about twice as long as broad; outermost achenes usually beakless                  H. glabra a
   2. Plants perennial, with evidently hispid leaves; heads showy, the ligules evidently surpassing
      the involucre and about 4 times as long as wide; outermost achenes usually with well-devel-
      oped beak (like the inner achenes)                                                                      H. radicata
1. Pappus bristles all alike, of long plumose bristles; flowering stems with a few more or less well-
   developed leaves, at least toward the base.
   3. Flowers yellow; middle and outer involucral bracts hispid; heads relatively broad, the involu-
      cres campanulate, nearly as wide as high or wider, mostly 5–8 mm wide at the middle at
      flowering time                                                                                       H. brasiliensis
   3. Flowers white; involucral bracts glabrous or inconspicuously tomentose-puberulent; heads
      narrow, the involucres cylindric, ca. half as wide as high or less, mostly 2–4 mm wide at the
      middle at flowering time                                                                          H. microcephala

Hypochaeris glabra L., (smooth, hair-less). Annual or winter annual, ± glabrous; stems 10–40 cm
tall, leafless or minutely bracteate; leaves basal; leaf blades oblanceolate, toothed or pinnatifid;
heads 1–several; involucres ca. 8–10 mm high at flowering, to 17 mm in fruit; flowers all ligulate;
corollas yellow, the ligules ± equal to involucre in length; body of achenes 4–5 mm long, the in-
ner ones with well-developed beaks, the outer beakless; pappus bristles of 2 types, the inner
plumose, the outermost shorter and merely barbellate. Frequently mowed hay field;
Williamson Co. (T.J. Watson 1620, 1993, BRIT, LL/TEX) is the only collection seen from Texas
(Diggs et al. 1997). Feb–? Native of Europe. I

Hypochaeris brasiliensis (Less.) Griseb. var. tweedyi (Hook. & Arn.) Baker, (sp.: of Brazil; var.: for
John Tweedie, 1775–1862, Scottish gardener at the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh and collec-
tor in South America), a yellow-flowered South American species related to H. microcephala,
was first reported for TX by Tomb (1974). It is known from vegetational area 1 (Hatch et al.
1990). [H. tweedyi Hook. & Arn.] I

Hypochaeris microcephala (Sch.Bip.) Cabrera var. albiflora (Kuntze) Cabrera, (small-headed;
var.: white-flowered), a white-flowered South American taxon first reported for North America
(southeastern TX) by Shinners (1966b) is known from both e and se TX (Hatch et al. 1990). At
present this weedy species is rapidly spreading in se TX (G. Nesom, pers. comm., 1998) and is
likely to soon become a member of the nc TX flora. I

Hypochaeris radicata L., (having conspicuous roots), a yellow-flowered perennial species simi-
lar to H. glabra, is also known from e TX. This European species was apparently first collected
in the state in 1970 (Tomb 1974). I

                                   IVA SUMPWEED, MARSH-ELDER
Ours annual herbs; leaves opposite or sometimes alternate above, entire to toothed, resinous-
glandular, petiolate; inflorescences spike-like or raceme-like in paniculate arrangements; heads
small, inconspicuous (plants wind pollinated), sessile or subsessile in the axils of bracts, the
peripheral flowers pistillate, the central flowers staminate; phyllaries distinct or united; stami-
nate corollas funnelform; pistillate corollas tubular; pappus none.

AA genus of 15 species native from North America to the West Indies; pollen from some spe-
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     377




                                                                                        Hieracium gronovii [BB2]




                   Hymenopappus artemisiifolius [HEA]




                                                                   Hymenopappus scabiosaeus var. corymbosus [BB2]




Hymenopappus tenuifolius [RYD]                 Hymenoxys odorata [REE]                     Hypochaeris glabra [BEN]
378   ASTERACEAE/KRIGIA

cies causes hay fever. (Latin name from the mint Ajuga iva Schreb., with similar odor) (tribe
Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Rydberg 1922; Jackson 1960; Bolick 1985.
1. Phyllaries united into a cup-like involucre with toothed margin; leaves linear to lanceolate, 2–5
   cm long, 2–12 mm wide                                                                             I. angustifolia
1. Phyllaries 3 or 4, distinct; leaves ovate to lanceolate, 3–15 cm long, ca. 20–70 mm wide                I. annua

Iva angustifolia Nutt. ex DC., (narrow-leaved), NARROW-LEAF SUMPWEED, MARSH-ELDER. Stems
0.5–1.4 m tall; leaf blades entire to serrate, the larger ones conspicuously 3-nerved; heads
subsessile in axils of usually linear or filiform bracts; involucres 2–3 mm broad; corollas 1.5–2
mm long; mature achenes black, 2–2.8 mm long. Low moist areas, prairies, and post oak wood-
lands; widespread in TX. Sep–Nov.

Iva annua L., (annual), MARSH-ELDER, SEA-COAST SUMPWEED, SHARP-BRACT SUMPWEED, PELOCOTE.
Stems 0.4–2 m tall; leaf blades serrate, 3-nerved, reduced upward to bracts, aromatic; heads
sessile in axils of linear to ovate bracts; involucres 4–5 mm broad; corollas 1.5–2.5 mm long;
mature achenes brown, 2–4.5 mm long. Low moist areas, calcareous or sandy soils, sometimes
forming extensive stands; widespread, but mainly e 1/2 of TX. Sep–Nov. The wind-borne pollen
is a cause of hay fever (Jackson 1960); the achenes were formerly eaten by Native Americans
who domesticated this species (Heiser 1990b; Mabberley 1997).

                                    KRIGIA DWARF-DANDELION
Small, ± glabrous annual or perennial herbs; sap milky; leaves basal or alternate; leaf blades
oblanceolate or oblong-lanceolate to linear, entire or unevenly toothed or lobed; heads generally
small, usually solitary and terminal or few together; phyllaries nearly equal; flowers all ligulate;
corollas yellow or yellow-orange, open during morning in sunny weather; pappus none or
single or double, of scales or an inner ring of bristles and an outer ring of scales.

AA North American genus of 7 species. The 5 nc TX species all differ in chromosome number
(Kim & Turner 1992). (Named for David Krig or Krieg, died 1713, a German or Hungarian physi-
cian, who was among the first to collect plants in Maryland) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1947b; Vuilleumier 1973; Kim & Mabry 1991; Kim & Turner 1992; Kim et
al. 1992a, 1992b.

1. Phyllaries 4–8 times as long as wide, linear-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, numerous (8–16),
   becoming shrivelled or reflexed in age, never keeled; inner pappus of bristles 4–8 mm long,
   outer of as many or fewer short scales less than 1/4 as long; stems leafless.
   2. Plants perennials with a small tuber a few cm below ground, developing slender, whitish rhi-
      zomes; involucres 10–15 mm high; corollas 12–17 mm long; pappus with numerous bristles
      and numerous short scales                                                                        K. dandelion
   2. Plants annuals with fibrous roots; involucres 4–6.5 mm high (to 9 mm in age); corollas 4–7 mm
      long; pappus with 5 bristles and 5 scales                                                         K. virginica
                                                                                                                   a
1. Phyllaries 1.5–3 times as long as wide, lanceolate to ovate, few (4–10), remaining erect and ex-
   panded in age, with midvein which in age becomes a prominent keel; pappus absent OR of
   short scales or bristles up to 2 mm long; stems leafless or leafy.
   3. Stems leafless, unbranched (but stems buried by over-washed soil or robust plants may de-
      velop short, basal internodes); pappus of 5 well-developed short scales or both 5 well-devel-
      oped short scales and short bristles                                                          K. occidentalis
   3. Stems leafy, branched (but beginning to flower with leaves crowded at base and branches
      scarcely developed); pappus absent OR of much reduced scales and bristles.
      4. Pappus of much reduced scales and bristles (use hand lens or scope)                              K. wrightii
      4. Pappus absent                                                                                 K. cespitosa
                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS                    379




 Iva angustifolia [BT3, UKS]                  Krigia cespitosa forma cespitosa [BB2, BTT]




      Iva annua [LAM]                                  Krigia occidentalis [ BTT, IPL]




Krigia dandelion [ BTT, GLE ]   Krigia virginica [BTT, GLE]                              Krigia wrightii [BTT, HEA]
380   ASTERACEAE/LACTUCA

Krigia cespitosa (Raf.) K.L. Chambers, (growing in tufts). Variable annual; stems leafy, branched.
Shinners (1947b) treated the following 2 forms as species. Kim and Mabry (1991), Kim and
Turner (1992), and Kim et al. (1992b) have observed intermediate populations, have concluded
that the characters Shinners used to separate them are often correlated with environmental
differences, and that molecular data could not separate the 2 taxa; n = 4.

1. Corollas 2–4 mm long; involucres 3–4.3 mm high in flower, 3–5.3 mm high in age; heads 3–6 mm
   in diam.                                                                                      forma cespitosa
1. Corollas 5–10 mm long; involucres 5.3–8.3 mm high in flower, to 8.5 mm high in age; heads 6–9
   mm in diam.                                                                                     forma gracilis

forma cespitosa, WEEDY DWARF-DANDELION. Plant 35–40 cm tall; phyllaries 5–8. Stream banks,
damp woods, roadsides, and disturbed areas, especially on sandy soils; se and e TX w to East Cross
Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Mar–May. [K. oppositifoliaRaf., Serenia cespitosa (Raf.) Kuntze]

forma gracilis (DC.) K.J. Kim, (graceful). Plant 8–40 cm tall; phyllaries 8–10. Low spots in prairies,
or borders of woods, disturbed areas, chiefly calcareous clay, less often sandy soils; Post Oak Savan-
nah and se TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Apr–May. [K. gracilis (DC.) Shinners]

Krigia dandelion (L.) Nutt., (from its resemblance to Taraxacum —dandelion), TUBER DWARF-
DANDELION, POTATO-DANDELION. Scapose tuberous perennial 10–45 cm tall; heads large and
showy; phyllaries ca. 15; pappus of numerous bristles 5–8 mm long and 5 small scales; n = 30.
Sandy open woods, roadsides, and lawns; Grayson, Henderson, Hopkins, and Hunt cos.; also
Lamar and Parker cos. (Shinners 1947b); se and e TX w to nc TX. Apr–May.

Krigia occidentalis Nutt., (western), WESTERN DWARF-DANDELION. Scapose annual 4–16 cm tall;
phyllaries 4–7; corollas 3.5–3.8 mm long; pappus usually of 5 bristles 0.8–2 mm long and 5
small scales; n = 6. Sandy open woods, fields, and roadsides; Falls, Hopkins, Hunt, Kaufman,
Milam, and Navarro cos.; also Bell, Eastland, and Tarrant cos. (Shinners 1947b); se and e TX w to
West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Mar–May.

Krigia virginica (L.) Willd., (of Virginia), CAROLINA DWARF-DANDELION. Scapose annual 4–35 cm
tall; phyllaries ca. 10; pappus of 5 bristles 4–7 mm long and 5 small scales; n = 5 or 10. Sandy
open woods, fields, and roadsides; Burnet, Denton, Henderson, and Tarrant cos., also Comanche
Co.; se and e TX w to Grand Prairie and Edwards Plateau. Mar–Apr, rarely repeating as late as Oct.

Krigia wrightii (A. Gray) K.L. Chambers ex K.J. Kim, (for Charles Wright, 1811–1885, TX collec-
tor). Annual extremely similar to the dwarf form of K. cespitosaand the taller individuals of K.
occidentalis; the chromosome number of n = 9 is unique in the genus (Kim & Turner 1992);
chromosomal and molecular data (Kim & Turner 1992) indicated the species is more distinc-
tive than morphology would suggest. Roadsides, weedy areas, low spots, often in sandy soils;
Burnet, Dallas, Denton, Falls, Hunt, Kaufman, Navarro, and Tarrant cos.; according to Kim and
Turner (1992), K. wrightii occurs throughout most of nc TX; se and e TX w to nc TX and e
Edwards Plateau. [Apogonwrightii A. Gray]

                                         LACTUCA LETTUCE
Coarse annual or biennial herbs; sap milky or brownish; leaves alternate; leaf blades oblong-
lanceolate, coarsely toothed or deeply lobed; heads small, in terminal panicle-like inflores-
cences (these at first dense and spike-like); involucres narrow; phyllaries in several rows, un-
equal; flowers all ligulate; corollas yellow in most species to blue or white in a summer- and
fall-blooming species, open during the morning, withering greenish or bluish; pappus of nu-
merous hair-like bristles.

AA genus of ca. 75 species; cosmopolitan but especially n temperate. Lactuca sativa L., the cul-
                                                                                        LACTUCA/ASTERACEAE         381

tivated LETTUCE or GARDEN LETTUCE, lacks the bitter sesquiterpene lactones present in wild
species. (The ancient name of the lettuce, L. sativa; from Latin: lac, milk, in allusion to the white
sap) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Stebbins 1937; Vuilleumier 1973.

1. Corollas blue or white; body of achenes 4–5 mm long; beak of achenes stout, 0.5–1(–2) mm long
   or absent                                                                                               L. floridana
1. Corollas usually yellow; body of achenes of various lengths; beak of achenes thread-like, 2–10
   mm long.
   2. Plants annuals with taproot; achenes ca. 1 mm wide, 5- to 7-nerved on each face; beak equal
      to or conspicuously longer than body; latex white; midrib prickly on lower surface of leaf             L. serriola
   2. Plants biennials with thick crown; achenes at least 2 mm wide, 1- to 3-nerved on each face;
      beak equal to or shorter than body; latex brownish; midrib on lower surface of leaf prickly or
      not so.
      3. Body of achenes 4.5–5 mm long, the achenes including beak 7–10 mm long; pappus bristles
         7–10 mm long; involucres 13–22 mm long in fruit; upper leaf blades pinnately lobed, the
         margins conspicuously prickly toothed                                                         L. ludoviciana
      3. Body of achenes 3.5–4.5 mm long, the achenes including beak 4.5–6.5 mm long; pappus
         bristles 5–7 mm long; involucres 10–15 mm long in fruit; upper leaf blades usually not lobed,
         the margins entire to toothed but usually not prickly-toothed                                 L. canadensis

Lactuca canadensis L., (of Canada), WILD LETTUCE. Biennial; stems 0.5–2.5(–3) m tall; leaf blades
pinnatifid (the upper nearly lobeless), oblanceolate, narrowed to nonclasping base; achenes flat
and somewhat winged, the beak filiform. Typically in sandy soils; Denton, Fannin, Grayson,
and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. May–Aug. In some cases L.
canadensis and L. ludoviciana are difficult to distinguish; according to Correll and Johnston
(1970), in TX the two intergrade and introgressive hybridization has possibly occurred.

Lactuca floridana (L.) Gaertn., (of Florida), WOODLAND LETTUCE, FLORIDA LETTUCE. Annual 0.5–
2.5(–3) m tall; leaf blades deeply runcinate-pinnatifid, the terminal portion large, triangular,
the lateral lobes large, 1 or 2 per side; involucres 9–10 mm high; achenes flattened, unwinged,
mottled black and gray, the beak tapered, 0.5–1(–2) mm long or absent. Disturbed areas; se and e
TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov.

Lactuca ludoviciana (Nutt.) Riddell, (of Louisiana), WESTERN WILD LETTUCE. Biennial 1–2 m tall;
leaves pinnately lobed becoming deltoid and clasping in upper part, the midrib beneath some-
times prickly; corollas yellow or according to Barkley (1986), possibly blue (this color not ob-
served in nc TX); achenes flattened, somewhat winged, the beak filiform. Usually in calcareous
soils; widespread in TX. May–Jul.

Lactuca serriola L., (possibly from Latin: serrula , a small saw, referring to the toothed leaves, or a
corruption of scariola, an old name for wild lettuce), PRICKLY LETTUCE. Annual 0.5–2 m tall; la-
tex white; leaf blades pinnatifid, the uppermost unlobed, clasping, the margins prickly-toothed,
the midrib prickly beneath, sometimes conspicuously so; corollas yellow, drying bluish;
achenes 2.5–3 mm long, halfway flattened (lenticular), unwinged, the beak filiform, 3–4 mm
long. Disturbed sites; mainly nc TX and Edwards Plateau s and w to w TX. Apr–Aug. Native of
the Old World; name often but not originally written scariola. The widely cultivated GARDEN
LETTUCE, L. sativa, is thought to be derived from L. serriola (Moore et al. 1976). Cattle have been
poisoned by eating large quantities of the young growth (Kingsbury 1964). 9 I

Lactuca saligna L., (resembling Salix —Willow), WILLOW-LEAF LETTUCE. Just before this book
went to press, a large individual (ca. 2 m tall) of this species was discovered in a recently
planted landscape in Tarrant Co. (O’Kennon 14252, Fort Worth, 21 Aug 1998). While known
382   ASTERACEAE/LEUCANTHEMUM

from OK (Taylor & Taylor 1994), this European native has not previously been reported from
TX (O’Kennon et al. 1998). It is not clear whether it will become an established member of the
nc TX flora. It is a glabrous winter annual with milky latex. While the Tarrant Co. individual
has pinnatifid leaves, leaves in this species can vary from pinnatifid to entire. The corollas are
yellow with bluish or purplish on the abaxial side. In the above key it would come out with L.
serriola except that the midrib is usually not prickly on the lower surface of the leaf. Also, the
achenes lack bristles at the base of the beak (in contrast to L. serriola, whose achenes have con-
spicuous bristles at the base of the beak), the leaves are linear to linear-lanceolate, 0.3–5 cm
wide, with narrow lobes and entire or few-toothed margins (in contrast to L. serriola , whose
leaves are lanceolate to ovate, oblong-elliptic, or obovate, 1–10(–15+) cm wide, with broad lobes
and prickly-toothed margins), and there are usually 8–15 flowers per head (versus 14–25 in
L. serriola ).

                                      LEUCANTHEMUM
AA genus of 33 species of Europe and n Asia including a number of cultivated ornamentals;
previously treated in Chrysanthemum. The widely cultivated CHRYSANTHEMUMS or MUMS are
now treated in the segregate genus Dendranthema. Another segregate of Chrysanthemum,
Tanacetum, includes the European T. cinerariifolium (Trevir.) Sch.Bip. [Pyrethrum
cinerariifolium Trevir.] (PYRETHRUM, DALMATIAN INSECT-FLOWER), the flower heads of which
yield the monoterpene, pyrethrum, used since ancient times as an insecticide and now widely
used by organic gardeners (Fuller & McClintock 1986). 9 The leaves and flowers of some spe-
cies can cause contact dermatitis in sensitive individuals (Spoerke & Smolinske 1990). (Greek:
leucos, white, and anthemon, flower) (tribe Anthemideae)
REFERENCE: Arriagada & Miller 1997.

Leucanthemum vulgare Lam., (common), OX-EYE DAISY, WHITE DAISY, WHITEWEED, MOON DAISY,
DOG DAISY, MARGUERITE. Perennial; stems glabrous, 0.3–1 m tall; leaves mostly basal, the blades
spatulate-obovate, on long slender petioles; stem leaves alternate, the blades serrate to pectinate
to pinnately lobed, attenuate basally; heads solitary on long peduncles; ray flowers pistillate,
the ligules 3–toothed at apex, white, 10–nearly 30 mm long, 2–10 mm wide; disk flowers perfect,
the corollas yellow; receptacles naked; achenes 1.5–2 mm long; pappus a very short crown.
Open grassy areas, spreading in native prairie from “wildflower” planting; Grayson and Tarrant
cos.; otherwise not reported from TX; escaping more commonly in the e U.S. May-Jul(–fall). Na-
tive of Europe and Asia. While formerly included in Chrysanthemum and still treated there by
some authors (e.g., Jones et al. 1997; Taylor 1997), we are following Bremer (1994), Kartesz (1994),
and Arriagada and Miller (1997) in recognizing it in Leucanthemum. [Chrysanthemum
leucanthemum L., C. leucanthemum var. pinnatifidum Lecoq & Lemotte, Leucanthemum
leucanthemum Rydb.]

           LIATRIS BLAZINGSTAR, GAYFEATHER, BUTTON-SNAKEROOT
Herbaceous perennials from swollen, underground, corm-like structures; stem leaves alternate,
simple, ± sessile, the blades entire, essentially linear, usually punctate with resinous dots; inflo-
rescences spike-like or raceme-like, showy; phyllaries sometimes resinous-dotted, greenish to
purplish, pink, or white; ray flowers absent; disk flowers fertile; corollas purplish or rarely white;
pappus of bristles, these barbellate or plumose; achenes ± cylindrical, usually ca. 10-ribbed.

AAn e North American (including ne Mexico) genus of 43 species including some cultivated
as ornamentals. The common name BUTTON SNAKEROOT is derived from the use of the corm-
like structures in treating snake bites (Ajilvsgi 1984). (Derivation of generic name unknown)
(tribe Eupatorieae)
REFERENCE: Gaiser 1946.
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      383




             Lactuca canadensis [BB2]                                     Lactuca floridana [BB2, GLE]




                Lactuca ludoviciana [BB2, GLE]                                                Lactuca serriola [REE]




Leucanthemum vulgare [REE]                       Liatris aspera [GLE ]                      Liatris elegans [BB2]
384   ASTERACEAE/LIATRIS


1. Phyllary tips usually ± rounded; phyllaries glabrous; heads globose                                          L. aspera
                                                                                                                        a
1. Phyllary tips usually acute to acuminate; phyllaries glabrous or pubescent; heads longer than
   broad.
   2. Inner phyllaries with prolonged petal-like tips conspicuously longer than the corollas or pap-
      pus, the tips white or pink in color; corollas not pilose within the tube                                L. elegans
   2. Inner phyllaries without prolonged petal-like tips, the phyllaries green or purplish and not
      exceeding the corollas or pappus; corollas pilose within the tube (except in L. pycnostachya).
      3. Heads densely crowded in the racemes, the inflorescence axis thus not easily visible; bracts
         subtending the individual heads usually not or only slightly longer than the heads; heads
         with 3–12 flowers each, cylindrical, 8–15 mm long to end of pappus; inner phyllaries usually
         < 12 mm long (often much less).
         4. Pappus bristles merely barbellate (the length of the side hairs on the bristles only 3–6
            times the thickness of the central bristle axis), the side hairs inconspicuous even with a
            lens; heads with 5–12 flowers; plants 0.6–1.5 m tall; n part of nc TX                      L. pycnostachya  a
         4. Pappus bristles feathery (the length of the side hairs on the bristles 15 times or more the
            thickness of the central bristle axis), the side hairs conspicuous with a lens and often
            even with the naked eye; heads with 3–6 flowers; plants 0.8 m or less tall; widespread in
            Blackland and Grand prairies                                                                   L. mucronata
      3. Heads not densely crowded in the racemes, the inflorescence axis thus easily visible; bracts
         subtending the individual heads often conspicuously longer than the heads; heads with
         20–40 or more flowers each, broadly cylindrical, the well-developed ones (13–)15–20+ mm
         long to end of pappus; inner phyllaries usually 10–20 mm long                                      L. squarrosa

Liatris aspera Michx., (rough), TALL GAYFEATHER, ROUGH GAYFEATHER. Stems 0.4–1.1(–1.5) m tall;
inflorescences with heads not crowded, the central axis usually easily visible; heads 15–25 mm
broad, with 25–40 flowers; phyllaries ± puckered; corollas purple; pappus bristles merely
barbellate, 7–8 mm long. Sandy soils; Fannin, Grayson, Hunt, and Lamar cos., also Denton Co. (J.
Quayle, pers. comm.); se and e TX w to n part of nc TX. Jul–Oct. m/95

Liatris elegans (Walter) Michx., (elegant), PINK-SCALE GAYFEATHER, HANDSOME BLAZINGSTAR.
Stems 0.3–1 m tall; inflorescences spike-like, with heads ± crowded; heads usually 5-flowered;
prolonged inner phyllary tips serrulate; corollas white or light purple; pappus plumose, 9–11
mm long. Sandy soils, often in open woods; Cooke, Dallas, Denton, Grayson, Henderson, Lamar,
Limestone, and Milam cos; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. Aug–Oct.

Liatris mucronata DC., (mucronate, pointed), NARROW-LEAF GAYFEATHER. Stems 0.3–0.8 m tall;
inflorescences 8–60 cm long, spike-like, the heads densely crowded; corollas purple, 9–10 mm
long; pappus 6–7 mm long. Calcareous upland soils; Blackland and Grand prairies in nc TX; se
and e TX w to Edwards Plateau and Rolling Plains. (Jun–)Aug–Nov.

Liatris pycnostachya Michx., (thick-spiked), KANSAS GAYFEATHER, HAIRY BUTTON-SNAKEROOT.
Stems 0.6–1.5 m tall; inflorescences 15–30 cm long, spike-like, the heads densely crowded; phyl-
lary tips reflexed or spreading; corollas purple (rarely white); pappus 6–7 mm long. Sandy open
areas, prairies, in or around boggy places; Denton (wet area near Lake Ray Roberts) and Lamar
(Tridens Prairie) cos., also a plant growing on a roadside in Cooke Co. was observed in 1997 (S.
Lusk and J. Quayle, pers. comm.); mainly se and e TX. Jun–Oct. At one time, a poultice of the
roots was used in treating snakebite, leading to the common name (Tveten & Tveten 1993).

Liatris squarrosa (L.) Michx., (with parts spreading or recurved at the ends). Stems 0.3–0.6 m
tall; inflorescences raceme-like or paniculate, the heads not crowded; heads sessile or on short
peduncles, the terminal head often larger; corollas purple; pappus plumose. Sandy soils.
                                                                           ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             385




                                                                                        Liatris squarrosa var. glabrata [RYD]

Liatris mucronata [ROE]                  Liatris pycnostachya [CO1, GLE]




                Lindheimera texana [HEA, KEM]                                                 Lygodesmia texana [SBM]
386   ASTERACEAE/LINDHEIMERA


1. Stems, leaves, and often outer phyllaries glabrous OR pubescent; pappus 10 mm long; outer
   phyllaries 5–8 mm long, usually ciliate-margined; se and e TX w to e margin of nc TX    var.. alabamensis
1. Plants entirely glabrous; pappus 7–8 mm long; outer phyllaries 7–10 mm long, not ciliate-
   margined; widespread, East and West cross timbers and along Red River                          var.. glabrata

var. alabamensis (Alexander) Gaiser., (of Alabama), Heads 10–15 mm wide; corollas 10–12 mm
long. Limestone Co. near e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e TX. Aug–Nov. [L. glabrata Rydb.
var. alabamensis (Alexander) Shinners]

var. glabrata (Rydb.) Gaiser, (somewhat glabrous, becoming glabrous), SMOOTH GAYFEATHER.
Heads averaging 10 mm wide; corollas ca. 10 mm long. Cooke, Denton, Grayson, Lamar, and Tarrant
cos.; East and West cross timbers, and along Red River; also e TX. Jul–Oct. [Liatris glabrata
Rydb.] m/95

Liatris acidota (Engelm. & A. Gray) Kuntze, (possibly from Latin: acidus, sour, sharp), which
would key to L. pycnostachyaor L. mucronata in the key, is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for veg-
etational area 4 (Fig. 2). This species can be distinguished by the merely barbellate pappus
bristles, flowers 3–5 per head, and the phyllary tips appressed (not reflexed or spreading). It ap-
parently occurs only to the se of nc TX.

                          LINDHEIMERA TEXAS-STAR, STAR DAISY
AA monotypic genus native to the sw United States and n Mexico. (Named for Ferdinand
Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, German-born collector of Texas plants and correspondent of Asa
Gray and George Engelmann, resided in New Braunfels—Geiser 1948) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Turner & Johnston 1956; Turner & Woodruff 1993.

Lindheimera texana Engelm. & A. Gray, (of Texas), TEXAS -STAR, YELLOW TEXAS -STAR,
LINDHEIMER’S DAISY. Hispid-pubescent taprooted annual 10–30(–65) cm tall; leaves alternate and
subopposite or the uppermost opposite; leaf blades oblanceolate to rhombic- or ovate-lan-
ceolate, entire or coarsely toothed, sessile or short-petioled; heads usually solitary or few and
corymbose, on peduncles 1–4 cm long; involucres 10–15 mm tall, the phyllaries in 2 series, the
outer series narrower, longer, and more acute than the conspicuous inner; ray flowers usually 5,
pistillate and fertile, the ligules ca. 1 cm long, yellow or orange-yellow, 2-toothed at apex; disk
flowers few, infertile; achenes flattened, large, nearly as large as the inner phyllaries; pappus of 2
awns. Clayey or occasionally sandy prairies, roadsides; Post Oak Savannah and se TX w to
Edwards Plateau and Rolling Plains. Mar–May.

                                             LYGODESMIA
 SKELETON-WEED, SKELETON-PLANT, RUSH-PINK, ROSE-RUSH, RUSHWEED
AA genus of 7 species of the Americas, especially w North America. (Greek: lygos, a plant twig,
and desme, a bundle, from clustered stick-like or twiggy stems) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Vuilleumier 1973; Tomb 1980.

Lygodesmia texana (Torr. & A. Gray) Greene, (of Texas), TEXAS SKELETON-PLANT, PURPLE-DANDE-
LION, FLOWERING-STRAW, MILK -PINK. Glabrous and glaucous, low perennial with deep, thick,
woody root producing in age numerous vertical to oblique rhizomes, terminating in above-ground
stems, forming clumps; sap milky; stems 20–65 cm tall, with few reduced leaves or bracts,
openly and stiffly branched toward summit; leaf blades mostly basal, linear to lanceolate, entire
or usually deeply pinnately lobed; heads large; involucres subcylindrical, 10–25 mm high; flow-
ers all ligulate, with heavy sweet scent; corollas purple to pale lavender (rarely white), open
during morning; achenes 13–17 mm long; pappus of hair-like bristles, 10–15 mm long. Lime-
                                                                             MACHAERANTHERA/ASTERACEAE           387

stone outcrops and rocky calcareous soils; in nc TX mainly Grand Prairie and w, also Dallas Co. to
the e (Tomb 1980); widespread in TX except the extreme ne part of the state. May–Sep. m/97

                                          MACHAERANTHERA
AA w North American genus of 36 species including some used as indicators of selenium and
uranium. The genus is sometimes included in Haplopappus; some taxa previously treated in
Machaeranthera are now recognized in the recently named genus Rayjacksonia (Lane &
Hartman 1996). (Greek: macha, sword, and anthera , anther) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Hall 1928; Cronquist & Keck 1957; Turner & Hartman 1976; Hartman 1990; Mor-
gan & Simpson 1992; Morgan 1997 [1998].

Machaeranthera pinnatifida (Hook.) Shinners, (pinnately cut), SPINY IRONPLANT, CUT-LEAF
IRONPLANT. Herbaceous perennial from a woody, branching, underground structure, nearly gla-
brous to variously pubescent, often minutely glandular-pubescent; stems 0.2–0.8 m tall,
branched only in uppermost part; leaves alternate, ± sessile, often not much reduced upwards;
leaf blades 1–3 cm long, usually pinnately (rarely bipinnately) lobed, the sinuses usually ex-
tending 1/2 way to the midrib or more; heads solitary at the ends of the branches; involucres 5–
8 mm high; phyllaries in several series, often acute and minutely bristle-tipped, eglandular or
with scattered glands, straw-colored but the upper part with a dark often green area; ray and
disk flowers yellow; ray flowers pistillate, fertile; ligules 8–10 mm long; disk flowers perfect, fer-
tile; pappus of ray and disk flowers similar, of hair-like bristles; achenes ca. 2–2.5 mm long, pu-
bescent. Grasslands; Clay, Jack, Montague, and Young cos.; mainly w 1/2 of TX rare e to w part
of nc TX. Late May–Sep. [Haplopappusspinulosus(Pursh) DC.]

                               MARSHALLIA BARBARA’S-BUTTONS
AA genus of 7 species native to the United States. Watson and Estes (1990) indicated that mor-
phological variation is continuous among the species and that there are few abrupt boundaries.
(Named at the request of Muhlenberg for Dr. Moses Marshall, 1785–1813, nephew of the more
distinguished Humphrey Marshall) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Channell 1957; Watson & Estes 1990.

Marshallia caespitosa Nutt. ex DC., (growing in tufts). Small perennial; stems glabrous or mi-
nutely pubescent above; leaves sessile or basal ones petioled; leaf blades oblanceolate to linear,
5–15 cm long, to 1(–1.5) cm wide, entire; heads terminal, solitary or few, 2.5–3.5 cm across, long-
peduncled; phyllaries grading into bracts of disk, narrow, green, herbaceous; ray flowers absent;
disk flowers sweet-scented; corollas white or occasionally pink-tinged; pappus of 5 scales 2–3
(–4) mm long, ca. as long as the achene.

1. Leaves crowded near base of plant, with no or few leaves up the stems; heads usually solitary per
   stem                                                                                              var. caespitosa
1. Leaves gradually reduced upwards, the stems leafy except for peduncles, the leafy part of the
   stems usually as long or longer than the peduncles; heads solitary–several per stem                    var. signata

var. caespitosa, SEEP MARSHALLIA, BARBARA’S-BUTTONS. Clayey prairies and limestone outcrops;
Cooke, Dallas, and Denton cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Apr–May.

var. signata Beadle & F.E. Boynton, (marked, designated), BARBARA’S BRUTTONS. Limestone out-
crops; nc TX s to s TX and w to e Rolling Plains; more common in nc TX than var. caespitosa.
Apr–May. m/98

                                    MELAMPODIUM BLACKFOOT
AA genus of 37 species native to tropical and warm areas of the Americas, especially Mexico.
388   ASTERACEAE/MIKANIA

(Greek: melas, black, and podos, foot, alluding to the fact that each ray flower is subtended by a
small, foot-shaped bract that turns black upon maturity) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Turner & King 1962; Stuessy 1971, 1972, 1979; Stuessy & Crisci 1984.

Melampodium leucanthum Torr. & A. Gray, (white-flowered), ROCK DAISY, PLAINS BLACKFOOT,
BLACK-FOOT DAISY. Herbaceous or weakly subshrubby perennial; stems 15–50 cm tall; leaves
opposite; leaf blades linear to narrowly oblong, 2–4.5 cm long, to 1 cm wide, entire to pinnately
lobed, sessile; heads solitary, on peduncles 3–7 cm long; outer phyllaries united more than half
way; inner phyllaries each surrounding the achene of a ray flower, expanded hood-like above
the achene; ray flowers 8–13, pistillate, fertile; ligules 7–13 mm long, white; disk flowers stami-
nate with abortive ovaries, the corollas yellow; achenes 1.5–2.5 mm long; pappus none. Calcare-
ous soils; Bell, Eastland, Erath, Hamilton, Lampasas, and Mills cos.; Lampasas Cut Plain and
East Cross Timbers s and w to w TX. Mar–Nov.

                    MIKANIA HEMPWEED, CLIMBING HEMPWEED
AA mainly tropical genus of ca. 430 species of climbers; the single nc TX representative of
this genus is the only Asteraceae in the nc TX flora that is a twining vine. (Named for Joseph
Gottfried Mikan, 1743–1814, professor in the University of Prague) (tribe Eupatorieae)
REFERENCES: Holmes 1981, 1990.

Mikania scandens (L.) Willd., (scandent, climbing), CLIMBING HEMPWEED, HEMPVINE, CLIMBING-
BONESET. Perennial twining vine; leaves opposite, petioled, the blades ovate to deltoid, subentire or
undulate, generally acuminate; heads corymbose; phyllaries 4, equal, 4–5 mm long, acuminate;
ray flowers absent; disk flowers 4 per head; corollas whitish, sometimes pink-tinged; achenes 5-
ribbed; pappus persistent, of numerous bristles. Woodlands, low areas; Bell, Dallas, Grayson,
Hopkins, and Rockwall cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov.

                ONOPORDUM COTTON-THISTLE, SCOTCH-THISTLE
AA genus of ca. 60 species of prickly herbs native to Europe, the Mediterranean region, and w
Asia. (Ancient Greek name of the plant, from onos, donkey, and porde, flatulence, Pliny stating
that it produced flatulence in donkeys) (tribe Cardueae)

Onopordum acanthium L., (prickly), SCOTCH-THISTLE. Coarse biennial 0.5–3 m tall, often gray
from sparse to dense cottony pubescence; stems with wings 5–15(–20) mm wide, these with
spine-tipped lobes; leaves alternate, lobed or toothed, conspicuously spiny-margined, sessile,
decurrent; heads terminal, solitary or 2–5 in ± loose clusters, large (2.5–5 cm in diam.); phyllaries
linear-subulate, ascending-spreading, tapering from base to spine-tip; ray flowers absent; disk
corollas purplish or pinkish white, slender, 20–25 mm long; pappus of numerous barbellate
bristles 7–9 mm long. Roadsides and disturbed areas; first seen in TX at the Fort Worth stock-
yards (Tarrant Co.) in 1938, also Erath, Johnson, and Parker cos.; otherwise known in TX only
from 2 counties in the Edwards Plateau (Gillespie and Kerr), but given its local spread, this spe-
cies is potentially a problematic weed for the state. May–Jul. Native of Eurasia. I

                  PACKERA RAGWORT, GROUNDSEL, BUTTERWEED
Ours annual or perennial herbs, glabrous to woolly pubescent; leaves alternate, toothed to pin-
nately compound; inflorescences terminal, the heads cymosely arranged; principal phyllaries
in a single series, linear, with hyaline margins, subtended by an outer series of short, bract-like
phyllaries; ray flowers in ours ca. 8 or 13, pistillate, fertile, with yellow ligules; disk flowers per-
fect, fertile, the corollas yellow; pappus of numerous, white, capillary hairs; achenes cylindrical.

AA genus of ca. 60–65 species centered in temperate North America but with 16 species in
                                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             389




 Machaeranthera pinnatifida [ CUR]




                                                                                        Marshallia caespitosa var. signata [BBS]




                                        Marshallia caespitosa var. caespitosa [BT3]

Melampodium leucanthum [BB2]




                                                                                           Mikania scandens [BT3]




                      Onopordum acanthium [GAR, M&F]
390   ASTERACEAE/PACKERA

Mexico and some in Siberia; it is well known for imprecise and intergrading species (Barkley et
al. 1996). While sometimes still treated in the genus Senecio in the broad sense (Kartesz 1994;
Jones et al. 1997), we are following Freeman and Barkley (1995), Barkley et al. (1996), and T.
Barkley (pers. comm.) in treating the aureoid group of Senecios as Packera . In addition to mor-
phological differences, the genera differ in chromosome number; in Packera n = 23 (more rarely
22) or a derivative, while in Senecio n = 20 (more rarely 10) or a derivative. 9 As with Senecio,
some contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids (e.g., senecionine) which can cause severe liver damage
and even death in livestock (Morton 1982); because similar effects are to be expected in people,
the plants should not be used as herbal teas or ingested in other ways. (Named for John G.
Packer, botanist and friend of Á. and D. Löve, who named the genus) (tribe Senecioneae)
R EFERENCES : Greenman 1915–1918; Barkley 1962, 1978, 1981, 1985a, 1985b, 1986, 1988;
Vuilleumier 1969a; Löve & Löve 1975 [1976]; Freeman & Barkley 1995; Barkley et al. 1996.

1. Basal leaves pinnately compound or very deeply lobed; basal leaves and stem leaves usually
   similar; leaves ± well-distributed along the stem, only gradually reduced upwards; annuals with
   delicate taproot or fibrous roots, without rhizomes or stolons.
   2. Plants usually with a delicate, distinct, main taproot; lateral lobes of lower and middle stem
      leaves often contracted to very narrow linear basal portions that attaches to the midrib (this
      character, while frequently used to separate these 2 species, does not appear to always be
      dependable in nc TX); widespread weed in open disturbed sites in nc TX                              P. tampicana
   2. Plants with a cluster of fibrous roots, a taproot lacking; lateral lobes of lower and middle stem
      leaves tapering to base, but usually with a broad attachment to the midrib; disturbed damp
      sites, often in partial shade; rare in nc TX, mainly se and e TX                                      P. glabella
1. Basal leaves shallowly toothed or deeply lobed; basal leaves and stem leaves quite different in
   appearance; largest leaves crowded near base of plant, progressively reduced up the stem;
   perennials from an abruptly foreshortened rhizome or an elongated rhizome, sometimes with
   stolons.
   3. Plants glabrous except in leaf axils; inflorescences without woolly pubescence; blades of the
      basal leaves ovate to orbicular, < 1.5 times as long as wide; in wooded bottomlands                   P. obovata
   3. Plants unevenly woolly-pubescent when young, becoming partly glabrous but with at least
      some woolly pubescence at the nodes of the inflorescences; blades of the basal leaves ob-
      long-elliptic or lanceolate, > 1.5 times as long as wide; in prairies and upland woods              P. plattensis

Packera glabella (Poir.) C. Jeffrey, (somewhat smooth, hairless), BUTTERWEED, YELLOWTOP. An-
nual 10–80(–100) cm tall with a tuft of fibrous roots and no persistent taproot; terminal leaf
segments variously sub-orbicular to ovate or obovate, usually undulate; phyllaries ca. 5 mm
long; ligules ca. 4.5 mm long; achenes with some fine hairs (rarely glabrous), ca. 1.7 mm long.
Moist, disturbed, often sandy soils, usually with at least partial shade; se and e TX w to n Red
River Co. just e of nc TX, also reported for Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997). This
species is superficially similar to P. tampicana. Mar–May. [Senecio glabellus Poir.] Liver damage
and death have been reported in livestock; symptoms may not appear for 1 or 2 months after
grazing (Morton 1982). 9

Packera obovata (Muhl. ex Willd.) W.A. Weber & Á. Löve, (obovate), GOLDEN GROUNDSEL,
ROUND-LEAF GROUNDSEL, OVATE-LEAF RAGWORT. Perennial 20–50(–70) cm tall, fibrous-rooted
and rhizomatous, usually stoloniferous; basal leaves often purplish beneath; phyllaries 3–7 mm
long; ligules 5–10 mm long; achenes usually glabrous, ca. 2.3 mm long; pappus bristles to ca. 6
mm long. Stream bottom woods; e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau; also Trans-Pecos. Feb–
Apr. [Senecio obovatusMuhl. ex Willd.] This is one of the earliest flowering native wildflowers
in nc TX.

Packera plattensis (Nutt.) Á. Löve & D. Löve, (of the Platte River region), PRAIRIE GROUNDSEL,
                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS          391




 Packera glabella [STE]           Packera obovata [BB2]                          Palafoxia callosa [BT3]




                                                                   Palafoxia hookeriana var. hookeriana [NIC]




Packera plattensis [BB2, BT3]   Packera tampicana [HEA]                  Palafoxia reverchonii [RHO]
392   ASTERACEAE/PALAFOXIA

PRAIRIE RAGWORT. Biennial or perennial, fibrous-rooted, short rhizomatous, sometimes stolonif-
erous; stems 10–50(–70) cm tall; leaves sometimes purplish-tinged; phyllaries 5–6(–7) mm long;
ligules 4–6 mm long; achenes with fine hairs, ca. 2.5 mm long. Prairies and open woods, calcar-
eous soils; nc TX w to Rolling Plains and s to Edwards Plateau; rare in e TX. Mar–May. [Senecio
plattensis Nutt.] Reported to be poisonous (Kingsbury 1964). 9

 Packera tampicana (DC.) C. Jeffrey, (of Tampico, Mexico), YELLOWTOP. Glabrous, low annual 10–
40(–80) cm tall; similar to P. glabella; taprooted, but taproot sometimes poorly developed and
masked by lateral roots; lower herbage often variously anthocyanic; terminal leaf segments of-
ten subreniform and dentate; phyllaries 3–7 mm long. Weedy in low prairies, disturbed areas,
roadsides, typically in open places; populations in some areas (e.g., Hagerman N.W.R. in
Grayson Co.) can number in the tens of thousands; widespread in TX, more abundant in e 1/2.
Apr–May. [Senecio imparipinnatus Klatt., S. greggii Rydb., S. tampicanus DC.]

                                                 PALAFOXIA
Ours annual herbs, often glandular; leaves alternate or first ones opposite; leaf blades linear to
narrowly elliptical, lanceolate, or narrowly ovate; heads peduncled, irregularly corymbose;
phyllaries in 2 series, narrowly obovate, scarious-margined or -tipped; receptacles naked; ray
flowers absent or present, if present fertile, with pink to violet ligules; disk flowers radially
symmetrical or irregularly lobed, perfect, fertile; corollas pink to purplish, the limb divided
nearly to base, the lobes linear to narrowly oblong, the tube slender; achenes narrowly obconic,
4-angled, pubescent; pappus of 7–10 scales, minute to long acuminate.

AA genus of 12 species native to the s U.S. and Mexico; some are cultivated as ornamentals.
(Named either for José de Palafox y Melzi, 1780–1847, a Spanish general, or for Juan de Palafox y
Mendoza, 1600–1659, a prelate—Wagner et al. 1990) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes lumped into
Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Ammerman (or as Baltzer) 1944; Cory 1946; Shinners 1952; Turner & Morris 1976.

1. Heads with disk flowers only; all achenes with similar pappus.
   2. Phyllaries 0.6–1.2 mm wide, narrowly linear, usually 3–5 mm long; pappus scales 0.5–2 mm
      long; mainly on limestone derived soils; widespread in nc TX                                         P. callosa
   2. Phyllaries 1.2–2.5 mm wide, linear to obovate, 5–10 mm long; pappus scales 1–8 mm long;
      mainly on sandy soils; rare in nc TX                                                                   P. rosea
1. Heads with conspicuous ray flowers; ray and disk achenes with pappus greatly different in size.
   3. Leaf blades linear to linear-lanceolate, 2–4(–6) mm wide; stems (except for inflorescence) not
      glandular; phyllaries 6–8 mm long; achenes 5–6 mm long                                         P. reverchonii
   3. Leaf blades narrowly to broadly lanceolate, 3–25 mm wide; stems usually glandular for some
      distance below the inflorescence; phyllaries 7–20(–25) mm long; achenes 6–9 mm long.
      4. Phyllaries 2–2.5(–3) mm wide; ligules of ray flowers mostly 10 mm long or less; stems
         usually branched at or below middle; extreme n part of nc TX                                 P. sphacelata
      4. Phyllaries 2–5 mm wide; ligules of ray flowers mostly 10–12 mm long; stems usually branched
         at or above middle; extreme se part of nc TX                                                P. hookeriana

Palafoxia callosa (Nutt.) Torr. & A. Gray, (thick-skinned), SMALL PALAFOXIA. Plant scabrous,
glandular; stems 20–60 cm tall; leaf blades linear, 1–4 mm wide, with glandular-based hairs;
peduncles densely stipitate-glandular; anthers brownish to reddish purple; achenes 3–5 mm
long. Calcareous soils, disturbed habitats; e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov.

Palafoxia hookeriana Torr. & A. Gray var. hookeriana, (for William Jackson Hooker, 1785–1865,
director of Kew Gardens), SHOWY PALAFOXIA. Stems 25–180 cm tall, densely viscid-glandular
throughout; leaf blades narrowly to broadly lanceolate, 5–10 cm long, 4–25 mm wide; phyllar-
                                                                             PARTHENIUM/ASTERACEAE    393

ies (7–)10–15 mm long, with glandular and eglandular hairs; ray flowers with ligules pink,
showy, 3-lobed; disk corollas deep pink, 10–12 mm long; achenes 6–9 mm long; pappus of ray
flowers < 1 mm long; pappus of disk flowers 5–8 mm long; n = 12. Sandy soils, usually in forested
areas; Milam Co. (Shinners 1952) on e margin of nc TX; mainly se to sc TX; endemic to TX.
Sep–Oct. E

var. minor Shinners, (smaller), with the lower half of the stem without glandular hairs, is found
just to the e of nc TX in e Milam and Freestone cos.; endemic to TX (Turner & Morris 1976). E

Palafoxia reverchonii (Bush) Cory, (for Julien Reverchon, 1837–1905, a French-American immi-
grant to Dallas and important botanical collector of early TX), REVERCHON’S PALAFOXIA. Stems
10–90 cm tall; ray flowers with ligules pale to dark violet, with 3 lobes, the lobes 4–5 mm long;
disk corollas violet; pappus of ray flowers ca. 0.5 mm long; pappus of disk flowers 3–6 mm long.
Sandy soils, wooded areas; Limestone Co. at extreme e margin of nc TX, also Henderson Co.
(Turner & Morris 1976); mainly e TX; endemic to TX. Sep–Oct. Closely related to P. hookeriana
(Turner & Morris 1976). E

Palafoxia rosea (Bush) Cory, (rose-colored), ROSE PALAFOXIA. Plants scabrous, glandular; stems
10–50 cm tall; leaf blades with glandular-based hairs; peduncles stipitate-glandular; inflores-
cences corymbose, with ca. 3–10 heads; heads with 10–30 flowers; corollas pale violet, 7–10 mm
long; anthers brownish to reddish purple. Disturbed habitats. Jun–Nov.

1. Pappus scales 3–8 mm long, acute to long acuminate; phyllaries 7–10 mm long            var. macrolepis
1. Pappus scales 1–3 mm long, obtuse to acute; phyllaries 5–7 mm long                           var. rosea

var. macrolepis (Rydb.) B.L. Turner & M.I. Morris, (large-scaled). Sandy soils, open areas;
Eastland Co. (Turner & Morris 1976) on w edge of nc TX; sc TX nw to Panhandle.

var. rosea. ROSE PALAFOXIA. Forested areas; Dallas Co. (Buzzards Spring, Reverchon, 1902); mainly
se and e TX, rarely further w; endemic to TX and OK (Turner & Morris 1976).

Palafoxia sphacelata (Nutt. ex Torr.) Cory, (dead, withered), RAYED PALAFOXIA. Similar to P.
hookeriana; stems 10–90 cm tall, densely viscid-glandular; leaf blades narrowly to broadly lan-
ceolate, 3–9 cm long, 3–20 mm wide; ray flowers with ligules pale to dark violet, with 3 narrow
lobes, the lobes 4–8 mm long; disk corollas pale violet, 10–14 mm long; achenes 6–9 mm long;
pappus of ray flowers < 1 mm long; pappus of disk flowers of ca. 8 scales 7–9 mm long; n = 12.
Sandy soils, grasslands; disjunct e to Grayson Co. in Red River drainage (Turner & Morris 1976);
mainly Trans-Pecos and Panhandle e to Rolling Plains. May–Nov.

                                            PARTHENIUM
AA genus of 16 species native to North America and the West Indies. The genus also contains
the GUAYULE RUBBER PLANT (P. argentatum A. Gray), a source of natural rubber (Rollins 1950),
native to w TX and Mexico; during World War II, because of rubber shortages, a program to
grow the GUAYULE RUBBER PLANT was carried out by the U.S. Forest Service (McGinnies in Foster
et al. 1983). (An ancient name of some plant from the Greek: parthenos, virgin; with only the
pistillate ray flowers fertile, i.e., producing achenes) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Rollins 1950; Mears 1975.

Parthenium hysterophorus L., (old generic name), FALSE RAGWEED , RAGWEED PARTHENIUM,
SANTA-MARIA, FEVERFEW, CICUTILLA. Pubescent, somewhat glandular annual, 0.3–1 m tall; leaf
blades, except uppermost, deeply once or twice pinnatifid; heads small (3–4 mm across), nu-
merous, in an open inflorescence; ray flowers pistillate, fertile, with ligules minute (< 1 mm
long), white; disk flowers seemingly perfect but functionally staminate, not maturing achenes,
the corollas white; achenes black, 2–2.5(–3.5) mm long; pappus of 2 petaloid scales. In and near
394   ASTERACEAE/PECTIS

towns and farms, disturbed areas; Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant cos.; widespread in TX. Sum-
mer–fall. Hairs and sessile capitate glands on the leaf surfaces contain sesquiterpene lactones
(parthenin and ambrosin) which can cause serious dermatitis in some individuals; this New
World native was introduced in India (first noted in 1956) presumably as a contaminant with
cereal grains; there it has become a problematic alien invader, crowding out the native flora and
causing dermatitis in agricultural workers (Lampe 1986; Mabberley 1987). 9

                                             PECTIS
AA genus of ca. 100 species of tropical and warm areas of the New World and the Galápagos
Islands. Like many members of the genus, Pectis papposaA. Gray, of the sw U.S. and Mexico, is
strong-scented; it was used by Native Americans for flavoring foods and as a perfume (Bradley &
Haagen-Smit 1949). (Greek: pectis, to comb, when the marginal leaf glands become broken, the
leaf has a somewhat serrated effect marginally—Bradley & Haagen-Smit 1949) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Fernald 1897; Bradley & Haagen-Smit 1949; Keil 1977.

Pectis angustifolia Torr. var. fastigiata (A. Gray) D.J. Keil, (sp.: narrow-leaved; var.: having
branches close together and erect). Strong-scented, fibrous-rooted, much-branched perennial
or some individuals annual; stems 5–15 cm long, sometimes woody at base; leaves linear, 10–40
mm long, 1–2 mm wide, glabrous, ciliate basally with bristles 1–2 mm long, often revolute, mar-
ginally glandular-punctate; heads congested at ends of branches; peduncles 3–30 mm long;
phyllaries in one row, subequal, 2.5–4.5 mm long, keeled, broadest near apex, with a conspicu-
ous subterminal oil gland 0.5–1 mm long and 1 or 2 pairs of smaller submarginal glands; ray
flowers 8, pistillate, fertile; ray corollas 4–6 mm long, yellow; disk flowers 8–21, perfect, fertile;
disk corollas 2.7–4 mm long, yellow; achenes 2.5–3.5 mm long; pappus 0.5–1(–2) mm long, of 0–
4 short scales forming a low crown. Usually on limestone, dry uplands; Bell and Bosque cos.,
also Coryell Co. (Fort Hoot—Sanchez 1997); also Travis Co. just s of nc TX; Lampasas Cut Plain
and Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Sep–Nov. Two other varieties of this species occur in s and
w TX and Mexico. [P. fastigiata A. Gray, P. texana Cory] E

                                   PERITYLE ROCK DAISY
AA genus of ca. 63 species native to sw North America with 1 in Chile and Peru. (Greek: peri,
around, and tyle, knot, knob, or callus, from the thickened margin around the fruit) (tribe
Helenieae)
REFERENCE: Powell 1973.

Perityle lindheimeri (A. Gray) Shinners, (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, German-
born TX collector), LINDHEIMER’S ROCK DAISY. Perennial from a woody base; plants (10–)18–45(–
60) cm tall; leaves opposite below, alternate above; leaf blades broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate,
2–5 cm long, minutely punctate, essentially glabrous, with large serrations/small lobes; peti-
oles 4–10 mm long; inflorescences cymose; involucres ca. 4–5 mm high; ray flowers 3–5, pistil-
late and fertile, the ligules 2.5–3 mm long, 1.5–2 mm wide, yellow; disk corollas 3–3.5 mm long,
yellow; achenes 2–2.8 mm long, linear to narrowly obconical; pappus usually of a single bristle
0.5–1.8 mm long and vestigial squamellae. Crevices in limestone bluffs; Burnet Co. (Balcones
Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife Refuge, C. Sexton, pers. comm.); s margin of nc TX and Edwards Pla-
teau; endemic to TX and NM. Spring–fall.

                PINAROPAPPUS PINK-DANDELION, ROCK-LETTUCE
AA genus of 6 species native to s North America. (Greek: pinaro, dirty, and pappus, down, fuzz,
pappus) (tribe Lactuceae)

Pinaropappus roseus (Less.) Less., (rose-colored), SMALL ROCK-LETTUCE. Glabrous, small (10–30
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS           395




                                       ACHENE
                                        WITH
                                       PAPPUS




                          var. rosea        var. macrolepis

                      Palafoxia rosea [BT3, RHO]                        Palafoxia sphacelata [BB2, RHO]




Parthenium hysterophorus [BB2]                                Pectis angustifolia [RHO]




                           Perityle lindheimeri [GR2]                                           Pinaropappus roseus [BT3]
396   ASTERACEAE/PITYOPSIS

cm tall) perennial with slender to thick, woody, branching root; leaves mostly basal; leaf blades
oblong-lanceolate to linear, entire or coarsely toothed or lobed; heads large (15–25 mm high in-
cluding corollas), terminal, solitary; phyllaries semi-scarious, in several overlapping rows, usu-
ally with prominent dark tips; flowers all ligulate; corollas pink to deep rose-lavender beneath,
paler to white above, the innermost ones yellowish; pappus of numerous hair-like bristles.
Limestone outcrops; Bell, Brown, Burnet, Callahan, Coleman, Shackelford, and Throckmorton
cos.; w part of nc TX s and w to Trans-Pecos. Apr–May.

                           PITYOPSIS GRASS-LEAF GOLDEN-ASTER
A A genus of 8 species of the e U.S. and Central America. Previously often included in
Chrysopsisor Heterotheca. (Greek: pitys, pine, fir, and opsis, appearance or resembling; possibly
for pine-like appearance resulting from the narrow leaves) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1951b; Semple 1977; Semple et al. 1980; Semple & Bowers 1985.

Pityopsis graminifolia (Michx.) Nutt. var. latifolia (Fernald) J.C. Semple & F.D. Bowers, (sp.: grass-
leaved; var.: broad-leaved), SILK-GRASS. Rhizomatous perennial; stems erect, 20–80 cm tall, usu-
ally 1–5(–more) per plant, with long, appressed, silvery white, silky pubescence; leaves linear to
narrowly lanceolate, ± grass-like in appearance, 8–25(–40) cm long, 2–20 mm wide, with pu-
bescence like the stems; basal leaves usually much longer than stem leaves; upper leaves re-
duced; inflorescences cymose-paniculate, with several to many pedunculate heads; peduncles
1–10 cm long; involucres at anthesis 8–12 mm high; phyllaries imbricate in 4–6 series; ray flow-
ers 9–13, with ligules 4–14 mm long, yellow; disk flowers 30–50, the corollas yellow; achenes
fusiform, 2.5–4.5 mm long, ribbed, strigose; pappus double, the outer whorl of setiform
squamellae 0.4–0.9 mm long, the inner whorl of capillary bristles 5–9 mm long. Wooded areas,
roadsides, waste areas, often in sandy soils; Tarrant Co. (Semple & Bowers 1985 cited Ruth s.n. at
TEX); mainly se and e TX. Aug–Nov. [Chrysopsisgraminifolia var. latifolia Fernald] Jones et al.
(1997) did not cite this variety for TX.



                PLUCHEA MARSH-FLEABANE, STINKWEED, FLEABANE
Annual or perennial aromatic herbs; stems erect, 0.5–2 m tall, glabrate below, pubescent above;
leaves alternate; leaf blades simple, ovate to elliptic, glabrous to puberulent or tomentose, some-
times with resin-globules, usually serrate to serrate-dentate or crenate; heads numerous; phyl-
laries imbricated, sometimes pink or purplish; ray flowers absent; disk flowers of two types: a
few central flowers perfect, infertile, the corollas 5-lobed; numerous outer flowers pistillate and
fertile, the corollas 3-lobed; corollas rose, rose-purple, or creamy white or yellowish; achenes cy-
lindrical, < 1 mm long; pappus of fine barbellate bristles in a single series.

AA genus of ca. 40 species of warm areas of the world. The key is adapted from Godfrey
(1952). The foliage is very aromatic with a strong camphor-like smell. (Named for Noel Ant.
Pluche, 1688–1761, French naturalist) (tribe Inuleae)
REFERENCES: Godfrey 1952; Robinson & Cuatrecasas 1973; Gillis 1977; Nesom 1989b; Keeley &
Jansen 1991.

1. Middle and upper leaves sessile, not narrowed at base, usually ± auriculate-clasping; corollas
   cream-white or yellowish; near extreme e edge of nc TX                                              P. foetida
1. Middle and upper leaves sessile or petiolate, tapering to a narrow base, not auriculate-clasping;
   corollas rose to rose-purple; widespread in nc TX.
   2. Phyllaries granular from minute, sessile, golden resin-globules; only the outermost phyllaries
      sparsely puberulent and ciliate, the median and inner phyllaries ± glabrous except for resin-
      globules; inflorescence characteristically an elongate panicle, the branches numerous and
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   397




                                                                                           Pluchea foetida [ROE]

                                              Pluchea camphorata [GLE]




Pityopsis graminifolia var. latifolia [UWA]




       Pluchea odorata [CO1]                  Pseudognaphalium obtusifolium [DAR]      Pseudognaphalium stramineum [HEA]
398   ASTERACEAE/PSEUDOGNAPHALIUM

     terminating in convex, panicled cymes, the central uppermost axis maturing first, but the lat-
     eral ones never equaling or exceeding it; leaves petioled                                      P. camphorata
  2. Phyllaries with resin globules or not; outermost and median phyllaries copiously puberulent
     and ciliate, the inner sparsely puberulent on their summits; inflorescence characteristically
     more truly cymose, the younger lateral branches elongating and exceeding the more central
     ones, thus producing a flat-topped or layered inflorescence; leaves sessile or petioled             P. odorata

Pluchea camphorata (L.) DC., (camphor), CAMPHORWEED, CAMPHOR PLUCHEA. Aromatic annual or
perennial to 2 m tall; leaf blades elliptic to oblong-elliptic, entire to serrate, the lower surface pu-
berulent, both surfaces sparsely dotted with resin-globules. Low drainage areas; Collin, Dallas,
Grayson, and Lamar cos.; se and e TX w to n part of nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Summer–fall.

Pluchea foetida (L.) DC., (fetid, bad-smelling), STINKING PLUCHEA, STINKING-FLEABANE. Aromatic
perennial 0.4–1 m tall; leaves usually auriculate-clasping but sometimes with cuneate bases;
inflorescences often flat-topped. Wet areas; Henderson Co. near extreme e margin of nc TX;
mainly se and e TX. Summer–fall.

Pluchea odorata (L.) Cass., (fragrant), CANELA, PURPLE PLUCHEA. Aromatic annual to 1.5 m tall;
leaf blades mostly ovate to lanceolate or elliptic, entire to serrate, essentially glabrous to tomen-
tose, resin-globules often present. Low drainage areas; Brown, Comanche, Cooke, Coryell, Dal-
las, and Denton cos.; nearly throughout TX. Summer–fall. [Conyza odorata L., P. purpurascens
(Sw.) DC.] Jones et al. (1997) used the name P. purpurascens for this taxon.

                    PSEUDOGNAPHALIUM CUDWEED, EVERLASTING
Annual or biennial herbs, whitish to grayish with felty or woolly pubescence at least when
young; stems erect or ascending; leaves alternate, sessile; inflorescences usually with numerous
disciform heads densely clustered, somewhat flat-topped; involucres woolly near base; phyllar-
ies scarious; receptacles naked; ray flowers absent; disk flowers all fertile; achenes glabrous; pap-
pus of numerous bristles, these separating individually or in clusters, not deciduous as a ring.

A A genus of ca. 80 species in the New World, Africa, and Asia; often lumped into
Gnaphalium. While often treated in Gnaphalium (e.g., Mahler 1988; Kartesz 1994), we are fol-
lowing Anderberg (1991), Jones et al. (1997), and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in recognizing the
following species in Pseudognaphalium. (Greek: pseudo, false, and the genus name
Gnaphalium, from an ancient Greek name of some downy plant, derived from gnaphalon, lock
of wool) (tribe Inuleae)
REFERENCES: Hillard & Burtt 1981; Anderberg 1991.

1. Leaves at maturity usually bright green and somewhat glandular-pubescent on the upper sur-
   face, not decurrent; widespread in nc TX                                                        P. obtusifolium
1. Leaves at maturity gray- or white-woolly on both surfaces, decurrent; rare in nc TX, known only
   from Brown Co. on extreme w margin of nc TX                                                      P. stramineum

Pseudognaphalium obtusifolium (L.) Hilliard & Burtt, (blunt-leaved), FRAGRANT CUDWEED ,
CAT’S-FOOT, FRAGRANT EVERLASTING. Aromatic annual; stems usually erect, 0.1–1 m tall, usually
white-woolly to subglabrate; rosette leaves with blades oblanceolate to spatulate; stem leaves
with blades linear to narrowly lanceolate or narrowly oblanceolate, 3–10 cm long, 2–10 mm
wide, white woolly below, green, ± glabrous or sparsely woolly or glandular above; involucres 5–
7 mm tall, whitish, developing a slight rusty tinge; achenes 0.8–1.2 mm long. Prairies, open
woods, roadsides, often in sandy soils; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also Edwards Pla-
teau. (Jul–)Sep–Nov. [Gnaphalium obtusifoliumL.]

Pseudognaphalium stramineum (Kunth) W.A. Weber, (straw-colored), COTTON-BATTING CUD-
                                                                               PYRRHOPAPPUS/ASTERACEAE         399

WEED. Annual or biennial; stems and leaves gray- or white-woolly, not glandular; stems erect or
ascending, 0.2–0.8 m tall; rosette leaves oblanceolate to spatulate; leaves mainly cauline, linear
to narrowly lanceolate or narrowly oblanceolate, 2–6 cm long, 2–5 mm wide, adnate-auriculate;
involucres 4–6 mm tall, shiny yellowish white; achenes 0.6–0.8 mm long. Rocky prairies and
fields; Brown Co. (Stanford 1971) on extreme w margin of nc TX; Rolling Plains and Edwards
Plateau w to Trans-Pecos. May–Oct. [Gnaphalium chilense Spreng.; Gnaphalium stramineum
Kunth]

              PYRRHOPAPPUS FALSE DANDELION, NATIVE-DANDELION
Annuals or perennials; sap milky; leaves basal and alternate, reduced upwards; leaf blades
oblanceolate or oblong- to elliptic-lanceolate, entire or usually toothed or lobed; heads solitary
or few, large and showy; flowers all ligulate; corollas yellow, open during morning; achenes
beaked; pappus of abundant hair-like bristles 7–12 mm long.

AA North American genus of 3 species; the roots of some were eaten by Native Americans.
(Greek: pyrros, flame-colored or red, and pappus, down, fuzz, pappus) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Northington 1971, 1974; Vuilleumier 1973; Barber & Estes 1978; Petersen et al. 1990;
Turner & Kim 1990.

1. Perennials with small tuberous thicking 5–20 mm thick located 2–15 cm below ground at end
   of roots; stems with 0–2 leaves or leafy bracts, usually pubescent or short-pilose; stems 10–30
   (–40) cm tall                                                                                     P. grandiflorus
1. Annuals with tapering taproot; stems with 1–9 leaves, pubescent or glabrous; stems 20–100 cm
   tall.
   2. Stems pubescent with curly hairs (rarely glabrous), mostly branched from the base; stem leaves
      1–5, the uppermost with blades deeply several-lobed; outer phyllaries usually 1/3 as long as
      inner or less; plants (5–)20–50(–60) cm tall                                                    P. pauciflorus
   2. Stems glabrous, mostly unbranched from the base; stem leaves 3–9, the uppermost with blades
      entire or merely toothed or with one pair of basal lobes; outer phyllaries mostly 1/3–2/3 as
      long as inner; plants (5–)30–100 cm tall                                                       P. carolinianus

Pyrrhopappus carolinianus (Walter) DC., (of Carolina), CAROLINA FALSE DANDELION. Annual or
biennial from a taproot; stems 30–100 cm tall; basal leaves in a rosette, often early deciduous;
stem leaves reduced upwards; principal phyllaries 15–25 mm long; achenes 14–17 mm long (in-
cluding beak). Sandy soils; woodlands and fields; in nc TX in East and West cross timbers, also
along Red River; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers. Apr–Jul, sporadically to Sep. [P.
carolinianus var. georgianus (Shinners) Ahles, P. georgianus Shinners]

Pyrrhopappus grandiflorus (Nutt.) Nutt., (large-flowered), TUBER FALSE DANDELION. Perennial
with a tuber giving rise to 1 or several, simple or branched, erect or suberect rhizomes, these de-
veloping near ground level; leaf rosettes and eventually flowering stems 10–30(–40) cm tall;
stems usually rather densely; pubescent with curly hairs, rarely glabrous; principal phyllaries
15–20 mm long; achenes 10–13 mm long. Rocky, clayey, or sandy prairies; Grand Prairie s and w
to w TX. Apr–May.

Pyrrhopappus pauciflorus (D. Don) DC., (few-flowered), MANY-STEM FALSE DANDELION , TEXAS
DANDELION, PATA DE LEON. Annual 20–60 cm tall; basal leaves in a rosette; principal phyllaries
16–20 mm long; achenes 12–14 mm long. Clay soils, prairies, roadsides; Blackland Prairie and
Grand Prairie; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun. Hybridizes with P.
carolinianus along highways where sand and limestone gravel have been brought in for fill.
Petersen et al. (1990) indicated that infraspecific taxa are not warranted. [P. geiseri Shinners, P.
multicaulis DC., P. multicaulis var. geiseri (Shinners) North.]
400   ASTERACEAE/RATIBIDA

                                 RATIBIDA MEXICAN-HAT
AA North American genus of 7 species; some are cultivated as ornamentals. (According to
Fernald (1950a), “… meaning, like most work of its author [Rafinesque], not clear”) (tribe
Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Jackson 1963; Richards 1968; Cox & Urbatsch 1990; Urbatsch & Jansen 1995.

Ratibida columnifera (Nutt.) Wooton & Standl., (bearing columns), MEXICAN -HAT, THIMBLE-
FLOWER, PRAIRIE CONEFLOWER, UPRIGHT PRAIRIE CONEFLOWER. Minutely scabrous-pubescent pe-
rennial, flowering the first year; stems 0.2–1.2 m tall; leaves alternate, compound or deeply
lobed, the ultimate segments linear or lanceolate; heads long-peduncled; ray flowers 3–7, infer-
tile, with ligules yellow or orange-yellow, usually but not always with dark reddish brown base,
sometimes with only the tip yellow, 10–20(–35) mm long, spreading or often reflexed; disk
flowers perfect, fertile, with corollas yellow-brown; receptacles columnar, conspicuously elon-
gated, 1.5–4.5 cm long; scales gray-pubescent; pappus of a minute awn ca. 0.6 mm long and of-
ten also a second shorter awn. Sandy, silty, or rocky open ground; throughout most of TX. May–
Oct. [R. columnaris (Sims) D. Don] m/104

                                        RAYJACKSONIA
AA North American genus of 3 species only recently named (Lane & Hartman 1996); it was
previously included in a broadly defined and polyphyletic Haplopappus; the taxa have been
treated in a variety of genera including Machaeranthera (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997).
We are following Lane and Hartman (1996) for nomenclature of the genus. Hartman (1990), re-
ferring to what is now Rayjacksonia as the “Phyllocephalus” group of Haplopappus, indicated it
is part of a x = 6 chromosome line including such genera as Grindelia and Xanthocephalum.
(Named for Dr. Raymond C. Jackson, student of Haplopappussensu lato who first reported the
correlation in the Astereae between a base chromosome number of x = 6 and a particular disk
floret corolla shape known as “goblet-shaped”) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Hall 1928; Hartman 1990; Lane & Hartman 1996; Morgan 1997 [1998].

Rayjacksonia annua (Rydb.) R.L. Hartman & M.A. Lane, (annual). Annual or weakly biennial
herb from a taproot, sparsely to densely glandular; stems erect, 0.3–0.7 m tall, branched above;
leaves alternate, ± sessile, often much reduced upwards; leaf blades oblanceolate to narrowly
obovate, 2–5+ cm long, 3–15 mm wide, with ca. 7–10 prominent marginal teeth on each side,
these mucronate or with a short bristle; heads solitary at the ends of the branches or ± corym-
bosely arranged; involucres 6–8 mm high; phyllaries in several series, acute to acuminate or ta-
pered to a minute bristle, densely glandular-pubescent (use lens), mostly straw-colored basally,
with darker (usually green) tip; ray and disk flowers yellow; ray flowers pistillate, fertile; ligules
7–10 mm long; disk flowers perfect, fertile; pappus of ray and disk flowers similar, of hair-like
bristles; achenes ca. 2 mm long, pubescent. Open areas; included based on citation of vegeta-
tional area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); also s part of e TX, Plains Country, and Trans-Pecos.
Aug–Oct. [Haplopappus annuus (Rydb.) Cory, Haplopappus phyllocephalus (DC.) Shinners
subsp. annuus (Rydb.) H.M. Hall, Machaeranthera annua (Rydb.) Shinners, Sideranthus
annuus Rydb.]

                 RUDBECKIA CONEFLOWER, BROWN-EYED-SUSAN
Annual or perennial herbs; leaves alternate, the blades usually unlobed or lobed to pinnatifid in
1 species; heads terminal, large, solitary or corymbose; phyllaries few, herbaceous, loose; ray
flowers infertile, with ligules deep yellow or orangish, sometimes partly reddish brown; disk
conical or ovoid to subcylindrical, often elongating after flowering; disk flowers perfect, fertile,
with corollas yellow-brown to blackish red-brown or dark purple.
                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             401




Pyrrhopappus carolinianus [STE]             Pyrrhopappus grandiflorus [BB2]



                                                                                              Pyrrhopappus pauciflorus [USG]




                                                 Rayjacksonia annua [BB2]


    Ratibida columnifera [BB2]




   Rudbeckia fulgida var. palustris [STE]   Rudbeckia grandiflora var. alismifolia [GLE]   Rudbeckia hirta var. pulcherrima [BT3]
402   ASTERACEAE/RUDBECKIA

AA North American genus of 15 species; some are cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for
Swedish professors Rudbeck: Olaf, 1630–1702, the father, and Olaf, 1660–1740, the son, prede-
cessor of Linnaeus at Uppsala) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Perdue 1957; Cox & Urbatsch 1990, 1994; Urbatsch & Jansen 1995.

1. Some leaf blades usually tri-lobed or pinnatifid; pales (= bracts on receptacle) subtending disk
   flowers with glabrous, long smooth points; rare in nc TX                                                 R. triloba
1. Leaf blades usually merely toothed or subentire; pales subtending disk flowers ciliate margined
   or pubescent- or bristle-tipped; includes species common in nc TX.
   2. Upper stem leaves auricled-clasping; leaf blades glabrous, glaucous; plants often very large, 1–
      3 m tall                                                                                             R. maxima
   2. Upper stem leaves slightly or not clasping; leaf blades scabrous-pubescent or hispid-pilose;
      plants 0.3–1.3 m tall.
      3. Style branches of disk flowers short and blunt; pappus present (often minute); foliage pu-
         bescent but not coarsely hirsute; pales without a bristle at tip.
         4. Ligules 1–3 cm long; plants rhizomatous; pales glabrous except for ciliate margin; leaves
            without microscopic resin globules                                                              R. fulgida
         4. Ligules 3–5(–7) cm long; plants with thick woody root or crown; pales canescent near
            tip with viscid hairs; leaves with microscopic resin globules (appear golden in light
            with lens)                                                                                 R. grandifloraa
      3. Style branches of disk flowers elongate, awl-like; pappus absent; foliage coarsely hirsute;
         pales with a bristle (or bristles) at tip                                                             R. hirta

Rudbeckia fulgida Aiton var. palustris (Eggert ex C.L. Boynton & Beadle) Perdue, (sp.: fulgid,
shining; var.: marsh-loving), MARSH CONEFLOWER. Nearly glabrous to strigose or hirsute peren-
nial; basal leaf blades elliptic to orbicular; stem leaves gradually reduced upward, with blades
ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate; ligules yellow to orangish. Disturbed areas; included based on ci-
tation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); e and nc TX and Edwards Pla-
teau. May–Jul. [R. coryi Shinners]

Rudbeckia grandiflora (D. Don) J.F. Gmel. ex DC. var. alismifolia (Torr. & A. Gray) Cronquist, (sp.:
large-flowered; var.: with leaves like Alisma—water-plantain), ROUGH CONEFLOWER. Perennial
0.5–1.0 m tall; stems glabrous to scabrous-pubescent below; basal leaves persistent, long-peti-
oled, with broadly lanceolate or elliptic blades; ligules orange-yellow. Sandy open woods,
chiefly low ground; Tarrant Co. (Mahler 1988); mainly se and e TX. Jun–Jul.

Rudbeckia hirta L. var. pulcherrima Farw., (sp.: hairy; var.: very handsome), BLACK-EYED-SUSAN .
Coarsely pubescent annual or short-lived perennial; leaves narrowed basally, subpetiolate to
sessile; heads peduncled; ligules yellow to orangish, sometimes reddish brown or purplish ba-
sally. Disturbed areas; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. May–Jul, spo-
radically to Sep. Rudbeckia hirta is reported to cause poisoning in cattle, sheep, and hogs
(Pammel 1911; Kingsbury 1964). 9

Rudbeckia maxima Nutt., (largest), GIANT CONEFLOWER, GREAT CONEFLOWER, LARGEST BROWN-
EYED-SUSAN. Glabrous, glaucous perennial, large and conspicuous; leaf blades ovate to oblong;
upper leaves sessile, partly clasping; ligules 3–8 cm long, to 12 mm wide, yellow or orangish yel-
low; pales pubescent apically; disks conspicuously elongating in fruit, 4–8 cm long. Forming
beds in low ground, sandy or silty soils; e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also Tarrant Co. (Fort
Worth Nature Center). May–Jun.

Rudbeckia triloba L., (three-lobed), YELLOW DAISY, BROWN-EYED-SUSAN. Short-lived perennial,
hispid to glabrous; leaves simple and cordate when young, often becoming 3-lobed to pinnately
5–7-parted; upper leaves ovate to narrowly ovate; ligules yellow or orange toward base. Creek
                                                                                      SENECIO/ASTERACEAE       403

bottoms, roadsides; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage; otherwise apparently only known in TX
from Nacogdoches Co. in e TX; first reported for TX by Taylor and Taylor (1981). May–Oct.

                    SENECIO RAGWORT, SQUAW-WEED, GROUNDSEL
Ours annual herbs, glabrate to usually pubescent; leaves alternate, the blades toothed to pin-
nately lobed; inflorescences terminal, the heads cymosely arranged; principal phyllaries in a
single series, linear, with hyaline margins, subtended by an outer series of short, bract-like
phyllaries; ray flowers usually pistillate, fertile, with yellow ligules, or ray flowers absent; disk
flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas yellow; achenes cylindrical; pappus of numerous, capillary,
white hairs.

AWhen broadly considered, Senecio is a huge, cosmopolitan genus of ca. 1,250–3,000 species
depending on circumscription. Species vary in growth form from trees to shrubs, vines, herbs,
or desert succulents, and include the GIANT GROUNDSELS on the mountains of e Africa. Accord-
ing to Barkley et al. (1996), new information and new concepts of taxa indicate that the genus
should be divided into various segregates. We are following Freeman and Barkley 1995, Barkley
et al. 1996, and T. Barkley (pers. comm.) in treating the aureoid group of Senecios as Packera .
Even when this and numerous other segregates are removed, Senecio is still one of the largest
genera of seed plants. 9 A number are toxic and can be problematic if eaten by livestock, espe-
cially horses; acute illness and death can result from hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids which
cause liver damage. Milk from grazing animals and honey from Senecio nectar reportedly con-
tain the alkaloids (Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977; Fuller & McClintock 1986; Blackwell 1990). Hu-
man deaths have been reported from ingestion of Senecio herbal teas as the result of liver dam-
age—there is no known cure (Lampe & McCann 1985; Tveten & Tveten 1993). Some Senecio
species were in the past used in poultices for wounds and abscesses; the common name
GROUNDSEL apparently is derived through a series of changes from the Anglo-Saxon:
grundeswelge, pus-absorber (Tveten & Tveten 1993). (Latin name of a plant, from senex, an old
man, alluding to the hoariness of many species, or to the white hairs of the pappus) (tribe
Senecioneae).
REFERENCES: Greenman 1915–1918; Vuilleumier 1969a; Barkley 1978, 1985a, 1985b, 1986; Barkley
et al. 1996.

1. Ray flowers yellow, prominent; main phyllaries and short, bract-like outer phyllaries below main
   phyllaries green-tipped; leaves shallowly toothed to subentire; native species                   S. ampullaceus
1. Ray flowers usually absent, but if present the ligules greatly reduced and inconspicuous; main
   phyllaries and short, bract-like outer phyllaries prominently black-tipped; leaves usually shal-
   lowly pinnately lobed; introduced weedy species                                                       S. vulgaris

Senecio ampullaceus Hook., (flask-shaped), TEXAS GROUNDSEL. Loosely woolly-pubescent to
nearly glabrate annual 30–80 cm tall; lowermost leaves narrowed to a subpetiolar base, auricu-
late-clasping at very base; middle and upper leaves often truncate-clasping; involucres 7–11
mm high. Sandy open woods, fields, roadsides; Burnet, Callahan, Comanche, Dallas, and
Denton cos.; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Mar–
May. E

Senecio vulgaris L., (common), COMMON GROUNDSEL. Annual 10–30(–60) cm tall, woolly-pubescent
to glabrate; lower leaves petiolate; middle and upper leaves sessile, auriculate, ± clasping, undu-
late to pinnately lobed, 2–10 cm long, 0.5–2(–4.5) cm wide; involucres 6–10 mm high; achenes
with fine hairs, 2.2–2.5 mm long; pappus 5–6 mm long. Disturbed areas; Dallas, Eastland, Grayson
(first noted Mar 1998), and Tarrant (first noted Mar 1998) cos., also Brown Co. (first noted 1987;
HPC); also Wichita Co. in Rolling Plains and Harris Co. in se TX; also Dimmit Co. (Cory 1948a);
apparently first collected in TX in Dimmit Co. in 1944 (Cory 1947, 1948a). Mar–May. Native of
404   ASTERACEAE/SILPHIUM

Europe. This species is among a number of Senecios that contain toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids;
animal deaths have been reported; the toxins are not lost upon drying and are still present in
hay (Burlage 1968; Lampe & McCann 1985; Fuller & McClintock 1986). 9 I

                                         SILPHIUM ROSINWEED
Herbaceous, coarse, sunflower-like perennials with woody crown or taproot; stems erect; leaves
alternate to opposite, simple, the blades toothed or deeply lobed, entire, stiff, leathery, often con-
spicuously scabrous; heads large and showy, terminal, solitary, corymbose, or spicate-racemose;
ray flowers pistillate, fertile, with ligules yellow or in one species white, producing mature
achenes that are flattened, thin-edged, and winged; disk flat or nearly so; disk flowers function-
ally staminate, not maturing achenes; pappus absent or of 2 awns.

AAn e North American genus of 23 species. The common name refers to the sticky secretions
on the stems and leaves of some species (Ajilvsgi 1984). Species of this genus are often confused
with those of Helianthus; however, in Helianthus the disk flowers produce mature achenes (ray
flowers do not), while in Silphium the ray flowers produce mature achenes (disk flowers do
not). (Greek: silphion, the ancient name of some resinous plant, transferred by Linnaeus to this
genus) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Perry 1937; Settle & Fisher 1970.

1. Leaves deeply pinnatifid.
   2. Ray flowers with ligules white, ca. 25 mm long; stems 1 m or less tall; achenes puberulent, with
      wings prolonged beyond the apex of the body of the achenes forming a V-shaped notch ca.
      3–5 mm deep                                                                                        S. albiflorum
   2. Ray flowers with ligules yellow, 25–40 mm long; stems 1–3 m tall; achenes essentially glabrous,
      with wings prolonged beyond the body of the achenes forming a notch ca. 1–3 mm deep
                                                                                                         S. laciniatum
1. Leaves entire to toothed.
   3. Leaves alternate or opposite above, with some subtending heads (leaves only very gradually
      reduced up the stem so that well-developed leaves are usually very near the heads); peduncles
      usually short                                                                                          S. radula
   3. Leaves alternate above, reduced, not subtending heads (no well-developed leaf close to a
      head); peduncles typically long and ± naked                                                           S. gracile

Silphium albiflorum A. Gray, (white-flowered), WHITE ROSINWEED, WHITE COMPASSPLANT. Stems
(0.2–)0.4–1 m tall; leaves alternate, rigid, very scabrous, vertically oriented, ca. as broad as long;
heads in a raceme-like arrangement; ray flowers with ligules white. Calcareous soils, open areas
and prairies; Blackland Prairie and Grand Prairie; nc TX s to Edwards Plateau and w to Rolling
Plains; endemic to TX. May–Jul. E m/105

Silphium gracile A. Gray, (graceful), SIMPSON ROSINWEED, SLENDER ROSINWEED. Plant subscapose;
stems (0.2–)0.3–0.6 m tall; leaves opposite below, alternate above and reduced in size and num-
ber; heads usually solitary on the peduncles; ray flowers with ligules yellow. Calcareous or
sandy soils; Bell, Hunt, and Milam cos.; se and e TX w to e part of nc TX. Jun–Jul. [S. reverchonii
Bush, Silphium simpsonii Greene var. wrightii L.M. Perry] The common name refers to the
sticky resinous material secreted along the stems and leaves; it was used medicinally by Native
Americans and also as a chewing gum (Ajilvsgi 1984).
Silphium laciniatum L., (laciniate, torn), COMPASSPLANT. Stems 1–3 m tall; leaves alternate, rigid,
vertically oriented, usually longer than wide; heads in a raceme-like arrangement; ray flowers
with ligules yellow. Calcareous or sandy soils, prairies; Cooke, Dallas, Denton, Grayson,
Kaufman, Tarrant, and Wise cos.; also se and e TX. Jun–Aug. The common name refers to the
vertical, supposedly north-south orientation of the leaves. m/105
                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      405




Rudbeckia maxima [BB2]                 Rudbeckia triloba [BB2]                     Senecio ampullaceus [CUR]




           Senecio vulgaris [GLE]




           Silphium albiflorum [CUR]                                 Silphium gracile [HEA]
406   ASTERACEAE/SILYBUM

Silphium radula Nutt., (rough), ROUGH-STEM ROSINWEED. Stems 0.3–1.2+ m tall; leaves alternate
to opposite below and above (varying in same population); median and upper leaves sessile and
entire or slightly toothed; heads solitary or a few in a corymbose arrangement; ray flowers with
ligules yellow. Calcareous or sandy soils; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and e Edwards
Plateau. Jun–Jul. [Silphium asperrimum Hook.] According to Correll and Johnston (1970), S.
radula apparently intergrades with S. gracile (as S. simpsonii var. wrightii). Silphium radula
seems very similar to S. integrifolium Michx., which occurs to the n and in TX only in the ex-
treme e part of the state (vegetational area 1) (Settle & Fisher 1970; Hatch et al. 1990). According
to Cronquist (1980), S. radula has longer, coarser stem pubescence with many or all of the hairs
ca. 1 mm or more long and leaves often alternate. Silphium integrifolium, on the other hand,
has most stem hairs ca. 0.5 mm or less long, varying to largely or wholly glabrous and leaves
mostly opposite. Our plants seem to have mostly shorter hairs with individuals varying from
having alternate to opposite leaves. While we are following Hatch et al. (1990) in treating the nc
TX plants as S. radula , more work needs to be done to determine the actual patterns of varia-
tion of these very similar entities. m/105

                                   SILYBUM MILK-THISTLE
AA genus of 2 species native to the Mediterranean region. (Greek: silybon, name for similar
thistle-like plants) (tribe Cardueae)

Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn., (with white-mottled leaves, the spots were supposed to have re-
sulted from drops of Mary’s milk falling on the leaves), BLESSED MILK-THISTLE, OUR-LADY’S-
THISTLE, HOLY-THISTLE. Coarse annual or biennial (rarely perennial?) 0.6–1.8+ m tall; stems
loosely woolly-pubescent, becoming glabrous; leaves alternate, mottled green and white, the
lower pinnately lobed, the middle and upper toothed; stem leaves auricled-clasping, all prickly
or spiny-margined, not decurrent; heads large (2.5–6 cm in diam.), solitary, terminal; phyllaries
to 5 cm long, with spinescent margins, constricted below middle, with broad bases and green,
sub-leafy apical portions tapering to a spiny tip to 8 mm long; ray flowers absent; disk corollas
rosy purple; pappus of numerous white, non-plumose bristles 15–20 mm long, deciduous as a
ring. Pastures and roadsides; Dallas, Johnson, and Navarro cos., also Hamilton Co. (HPC); also
Edwards Plateau; first collected in TX in Sutton Co. on the Edwards Plateau in 1938 (suppos-
edly introduced through a shipment of hay from California) and in nc TX in Navarro Co. in
1949 (Cory 1940, 1950). May–Jun. Native of Mediterranean region. The fruit is used medicinally
and considered since the time of Dioscorides to protect the liver; it contains flavonoids effective
as an antidote for mushroom (Amanita) poisoning—the mode of action is to displace the toxin
from cell membrane receptors (Mabberley 1987); its clinical use in Europe is widespread (Leung
& Foster 1996). I

                                              SIMSIA
AA New World genus of 18 species extending from the sw U.S. to Argentina with 1 taxon en-
demic to Jamaica (Spooner 1987; Schilling & Spooner 1988). (Named for John Sims, 1749–1831,
of Dorking, editor of Curtis’s Botanical Magazine ) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Spooner 1987; Schilling & Spooner 1988.

Simsia calva (Engelm. & A. Gray) A. Gray, (naked), AWNLESS BUSH-SUNFLOWER. Perennial, herba-
ceous from woody base, coarsely pubescent; roots fusiform or woody; herbage dark green; leaves
opposite, petioled, the petioles sometimes auricled; leaf blades deltoid, often lobed, serrate;
stipules toothed or serrate, often united; heads solitary at the end of long peduncles; phyllaries
in several series; ray flowers 15–30, pistillate, infertile, the ligules yellow or orange-yellow, some-
times spotted or striped beneath with purple or red; pappus absent; disk flowers perfect, fertile;
corollas yellow or orange-yellow, sometimes with purplish lines, gibbous basally; achenes flat-
                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS          407




Silphium laciniatum [GLE, STE]                                            Silphium radula [STE]




Silybum marianum [M&F, PNW]                                            Smallanthus uvedalia [GLE]



                             DISTINCT
                             PETIOLE




                                               AURICLES




                          MATURE        IMMATURE
                          ACHENE         ACHENE



     Simsia calva [HEA]                                         Solidago canadensis var. scabra [REE]
408   ASTERACEAE/SMALLANTHUS

tened, emarginate, appearing winged; pappus of 2 short awns, usually absent on mature
achenes. Calcareous soils; Coryell, Hamilton, Mills, and Shackelford cos., also Brown and
Comanche cos. (Mahler 1988); w and sw parts of nc TX through Edwards Plateau to Trans-
Pecos, also se and s TX. May–Nov.

                                       SMALLANTHUS LEAFCUP
AA genus of ca. 19 species of tropical and warm areas of the Americas; previously recognized
in the genus Polymnia. (Named for John Kunkel Small, 1869–1938, American botanist and au-
thor of numerous works including Manual of the Southeastern Flora) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Wells 1965; Robinson 1978; Turner 1988b.

Smallanthus uvedalia (L.) Mack. ex Small, (derivation unknown, not indicated by Linnaeus),
BEAR’S-FOOT, HAIRY LEAFCUP. Herbaceous perennial 1–3 m tall; stems erect, purple-spotted; leaves
at least lower, opposite, often huge, to ca. 70 cm long and 40 cm wide, ovate to deltoid, pal-
mately 3- to 5-lobed and veined, sessile or with broad conspicuous wings to base of petiole;
heads clustered in loose leafy cymes; phyllaries 4–6, 10–20 mm long, to ca. 10–12 mm wide,
ovate or ovate lanceolate; ray flowers 7–13, pistillate, fertile, the ligules yellow, 10–20(–30) mm
long; disk flowers numerous, infertile, staminate, yellow; achenes ca. 6 mm long and 4 mm
wide; pappus absent. Wooded bottomlands; Bell, Dallas, Fannin, Grayson (Hagerman N.W.R.),
and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX, w to nc TX and e edge of Edwards Plateau. Jul–Sep.
[Polymnia uvedalia (L.) L., Polymnia uvedalia (L.) L. var. densipilis S.F. Blake]

                                        SOLIDAGO GOLDENROD
Herbaceous perennials; leaves alternate, sessile or short-petioled; inflorescence terminal,
branched, of numerous, relatively small, often secund heads; phyllaries imbricated, in several
series, inconspicuously green-tipped; ray flowers pistillate, fertile, few, usually 14(–20) or less,
the ligules linear, yellow in ours; disc flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas cylindrical to funnel-
form, yellow in ours; achenes cylindrical, ribbed; pappus of numerous, white, hair-like bristles.

A A mainly North American genus of ca. 80 species with a few taxa in South America,
Macaronesia, and Eurasia. Because of marked phenotypic plasticity, polyploidy, and hybridiza-
tion, Solidago is a taxonomically difficult genus. Complete specimens including mature inflo-
rescences and lower leaves are often needed for definitive identification. Despite their bad repu-
tation, GOLDENRODS are insect-pollinated and thus do not produce significant windblown
pollen which could cause hay fever; most fall allergies are probably due to wind-pollinated spe-
cies of Ambrosia (RAGWEED) that flower at the same time as GOLDENRODS. The related genus
Euthamia, sometimes included in Solidago, is here treated separately. The key to Solidago spe-
cies is adapted from Taylor and Taylor (1984). Nesom (1993) split the genus Oligoneuron from
Solidago; it is a segregate of 6 species including 2 in nc TX, S. nitida and S. rigida. Until consen-
sus is reached, we are following Taylor and Taylor (1984) and Semple (1992) in treating it tradi-
tionally and keeping all species in Solidago; appropriate synonymy is given below; nomencla-
ture in general follows Taylor and Taylor (1984). (Latin, solido, to make whole or strengthen,
alluding to medicinal properties) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Kapoor & Beaudry 1966; Croat 1972; Anderson & Creech 1975; Taylor & Taylor
1983, 1984; Heard & Semple 1988; Gandhi & Thomas 1989; Nesom 1990d, 1991c, 1993; Semple 1992.

1. Inflorescence flat-topped or nearly so (= corymbose) (segregate genus Oligoneuron).
   2. Leaf blades usually densely pubescent, ovate, ca. 2–3.5 times as long as wide; ray flowers 7–14
      per head; usually flowering Sep–Oct(–Nov)                                                          S. rigida
   2. Leaf blades glabrous, linear to narrowly lanceolate, ca. 5–10 times as long as wide; ray flowers
      1–4 per head; usually flowering Jun–Sep                                                            S. nitida
                                                                                              SOLIDAGO/ASTERACEAE           409

1. Inflorescence elongate, not flat-topped, either racemose, paniculate, cylindric, or pyramid-shaped
   and broadest near base or midsection (Solidago in a narrower sense).
   3. Inflorescence racemose or very narrowly paniculate, less than 4 cm wide, ± cylindric in shape.
      4. Primary stems glabrous; leaf blades either usually glabrous OR scabrous on upper surface;
         basal leaves elliptic to ovate or ovate; upper stem leaves small, appressed; atypical forms
         (these species usually have broadly paniculate inflorescences).
         5. Stems subcylindrical; leaf blades with upper surface usually glabrous                               S. ludoviciana
         5. Stems, at least towards the base, bluntly 4-angled; leaf blades with upper surface strongly
            scabrous                                                                                                    S. patula
      4. Primary stems pubescent (pubescence often short); leaf blades usually pubescent on up-
         per surface; basal leaves absent at flowering time; upper stem leaves spreading to widely
         spreading                                                                                                  S. petiolaris
   3. Inflorescence paniculate, broadest at or near base, wider than 4 cm, not cylindric in shape.
      6. Primary stems essentially glabrous, rarely with sparse hairs; leaves glabrous.
         7. Inflorescence essentially glabrous.
            8. Leaf blades ovate, toothed along most of margin; in wooded habitats                                   S. ulmifolia
            8. Leaf blades oblanceolate, toothed only towards tip; in grasslands                              S. missouriensis
         7. Inflorescence pubescent, usually densely so.
            9. Inflorescence usually narrowly paniculate, with ends of branches erect; heads not
               secund                                                                                                S. speciosa
            9. Inflorescence broadly paniculate, triangular in outline, with ends of branches recurved;
               heads secund.
               10. Basal leaves absent; lower stem leaves absent at flowering time; stem leaves uni-
                    form in size.
                    11. Leaf blades lanceolate, usually with 3 veins (central and 2 somewhat weaker
                        laterals) more prominent than the others                                                     S. gigantea
                    11. Leaf blades ovate, usually with only 1 prominent vein (central)                              S. ulmifolia
               10. Basal leaves present; lower stem leaves 10–30 cm long; leaves reduced upwards.
                    12. Stems subcylindrical; leaf blades with upper surface usually glabrous                    S. ludoviciana
                    12. Stems, at least towards the base, bluntly 4-angled; leaf blades with upper sur-
                        face strongly scabrous                                                                          S. patula
      6. Primary stems pubescent (pubescence often short but dense—use lens); leaves usually
         pubescent.
         13. Leaf blades linear, minutely gland-dotted (view with back lighting); on extreme e mar-
              gin of nc TX                                                                                               S. odora
                                                                                                                                a
         13. Leaf blades lanceolate, ovate, or elliptic, not gland-dotted; widespread in nc TX.
              14. Inflorescence branches erect, not recurved apically; heads not secund or only slightly
                  so; panicle narrow                                                                                 S. speciosa
              14. Inflorescence branches recurved; heads secund (= on 1 side of branches); panicle
                  triangular in outline.
                  15. Leaf blades serrate.
                       16. Leaf blades ovate (rarely lanceolate), the venation often prominently reticu-
                           late beneath, with 1 main vein (central), the smaller laterals all ± equally promi-
                           nent, with long hairs on the veins (hairs much longer than vein width)
                                                                                                                       S. rugosa
                       16. Leaf blades lanceolate, the venation inconspicuously reticulate beneath,
                           with 3 main veins (central and 2 laterals) more prominent than the others,
                           with short hairs on the veins (ca. as long as vein width or slightly longer)
                                                                                                                 S. canadensis
                  15. Leaf blades essentially entire except for apical teeth on larger leaves of some taxa.
410   ASTERACEAE/SOLIDAGO

                   17. Leaf blades usually more than 5 times as long as wide, lanceolate or linear to
                       spatulate.
                       18. Leaf blades 1-nerved, spatulate, reduced up the stem; inflorescences
                            mostly longer than broad                                                   S. nemoralis
                       18. Leaf blades 3-nerved, lanceolate, ± uniform up the stem; inflorescences
                            pyramidal, often nearly as broad as long                                  S. canadensis
                   17. Leaf blades 2–4 times as long as wide, lanceolate or broadly oblanceolate to
                       elliptic or ovate                                                                   S. radula

Solidago canadensis L., (of Canada), COMMON GOLDENROD, CANADA GOLDENROD. Plant to 1.5(–2)
m tall; stems pubescent; leaves chiefly cauline; leaf blades 3-nerved, lanceolate, pubescent on
both surfaces; inflorescence triangular in outline; heads secund; involucres 2–5 mm high;
achenes short-hairy. (Jun–)Aug–Nov. According to Taylor and Taylor (1984), the differences be-
tween the 2 varieties are not clear and many intermediates occur.

1. Plants usually < 0.7 m tall; leaf blades < 7 cm long, ± thick, gray-green, with pubescence nearly
   the same on both sides; prairies and floodplains                                             var. gilvocanescens
1. Plants usually > 0.8 m tall; leaf blades usually > 7 cm long, ± thin, green, with pubescence on
   upper surface shorter and less dense than below; open areas in woods                                   var. scabra

var. gilvocanescens Rydb., (yellowish gray). E TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau.
[S. gilvocanescens(Rydb.) Smyth] This is the common variety on the prairies of nc TX.

var. scabra Torr. & A. Gray, (rough). Hopkins, Kaufman, Lamar, and Montague cos., also Dallas
Co. (Taylor & Taylor 1984); se and e TX w to nc TX. [S. altissima L., S. altissima var. pluricephala
M.C. Johnst.]

Solidago gigantea Aiton, (gigantic), GIANT GOLDENROD, LATE GOLDENROD. Plant large, to 1.5 m or
more tall; stems glabrous, usually red; leaf blades lanceolate, toothed along most of the edge,
glabrous; inflorescence broadly paniculate, triangular in outline; heads secund; involucres ca.
2.5–4 mm high; achenes short-hairy. Low wet areas, roadsides, margins of ponds and streams,
generally mesic areas; widespread in TX. Mid-summer–late fall. [S. gigantea var. serotina
(Kuntze) Cronquist]

Solidago ludoviciana (A. Gray) Small, (of Louisiana), WILLOW GOLDENROD. Leaves basal and
cauline; basal leaves with blades elliptic to ovate, abruptly contracted into petioles; mid-stem
leaves with blades narrowly elliptic to ovate, 10–35 mm wide, serrulate, glabrous or with sparse
pubescence, short petiolate to subsessile; inflorescences usually broadly paniculate; heads of-
ten secund; involucres ca. 4.5 mm high; achenes short-hairy. Disturbed areas, usually sandy
soils; Taylor and Taylor (1984) lumped this species with S. patula var. strictula (as S. salicina)
and mapped a number of nc TX counties (Dallas, Henderson, Hopkins, Johnson, and Navarro);
they indicated that most TX plants are glabrous (and thus S. ludoviciana); Hatch et al. (1990)
also cited vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2); se and e TX w to nc TX. Late summer–fall. [S. boothii Hook.
var. ludoviciana A. Gray]

Solidago missouriensis Nutt. var. fasciculata Holz., (sp.: of Missouri; var.: fascicled, clustered),
MISSOURI BASIN GOLDENROD. Plant 0.4–0.9 + m tall; stems glabrous; leaves frequently fastigiate;
leaf blades oblanceolate, toothed in upper half; inflorescence essentially glabrous, with sparse
pubescence, paniculate, broadest basally; achenes glabrous or with sparse hairs. Upland prai-
ries; Clay, Lamar, Montague, Tarrant, and Wise cos. in n part of nc TX; otherwise known in TX
only from Bowie and Wichita cos. (Taylor & Taylor 1984). Jul–Oct. [S. glaberrima M. Martens]

Solidago nemoralis Aiton, (growing in shady places), OLD-FIELD GOLDENROD. Plant to 1(–1.3) m tall;
stems pubescent, with basal rosette and persistent lower leaves; leaves reduced upward; leaf
                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS           411




Solidago gigantea [GLE]




                                                                  Solidago ludoviciana [HEA]




                  Solidago missouriensis var. fasciculata [BB2]




                                                                                   Solidago nemoralis var. longipetiolata [PNW]




Solidago nemoralis var. nemoralis [BB2]
412   ASTERACEAE/SOLIDAGO

blades spatulate, 1-nerved (only the midvein apparent), mostly entire, pubescent; inflorescence
paniculate, longer than broad; heads secund; achenes short-hairy. Dry upland sites. Aug–Nov.

1. Main stem leaves with blades linear-oblanceolate to linear, the upper sometimes much reduced
   in size, the lower ones 7–10 times as long as wide; involucres 4.5–6.5 mm high; widespread in nc
   TX                                                                                           var. longipetiolata
1. Main stem leaves with blades oblanceolate to obovate, the upper gradually reduced in size, the
   lower ones 3–6 times as long as wide; involucres 3–4.5 mm high; mainly e TX                        var. nemoralis

var. longipetiolata (Mack. & Bush) E.J. Palmer & Steyerm., (long-petioled). Bell and Grayson cos.
w to e Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. [S. decemflora DC., S. nemoralis var. decemflora
Fernald]

var. nemoralis. OLD-FIELD GOLDENROD. A BRIT sheet (Taylor 27009) from Lamar Co. is possibly
var. nemoralis; mainly e TX.

Solidago nitida Torr. & A. Gray, (shining), SHINY GOLDENROD, FLAT-TOPPED GOLDENROD. Plant 0.5–
1.2 m tall; stems essentially glabrous; leaf blades linear, almost grass-like, glabrous; inflores-
cence corymbose, flat-topped; involucres ca. 5 mm high, the phyllaries multiveined; achenes
glabrous. Prairies and disturbed areas; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers. Jun–Sep, a prima-
rily summer-blooming species. Sometimes placed in the segregate genus Oligoneuron [as O.
nitidum (Torr. & A. Gray) Small].

Solidago odora Aiton, (odorous, fragrant), FRAGRANT GOLDENROD, SWEET GOLDENROD. Plant to
1.2 m tall; stems pubescent; leaf blades linear, essentially glabrous except for margin, minutely
gland-dotted (when viewed with back lighting), often with an anise odor when crushed; in-
volucres 4–5 mm high; achenes glabrate or short-hairy. Roadsides, woods; Henderson Co., also
Lamar Co. (Taylor & Taylor 1984); mainly se and e TX. Sep–Nov.

Solidago patula Muhl. var. strictula Torr. & A. Gray, (sp.: spreading; var.: somewhat erect, up-
right), WILLOW GOLDENROD. Stems glabrous below the rough-puberulent inflorescence, bluntly
4-angled at least below; leaves basal and cauline; basal rosettes of large, long-petiolate leaves,
the blades broadly elliptic to obovate; mid-stem leaves subsessile or short-petioled, the blades
elliptic, strongly scabrous on upper surface; inflorescences usually broadly paniculate; heads
often secund; involucres ca. 4.7 mm high; achenes glabrate. Disturbed areas; possibly rare in e
part of nc TX; Taylor and Taylor (1984) lumped this taxon with S. ludoviciana, recognized it
under the name S. salicina, and cited a number of nc TX counties; however, they indicated that
most TX plants have glabrous leaves (and are thus S. ludoviciana); they stated of the two taxa
that “Our own field and herbarium studies indicate they are the same entity. . .” ; mainly e TX
possibly w to nc TX. Late Aug–Oct. [S. salicina Elliott]

Solidago petiolaris Aiton, (with a petiole or leaf stalk). Plant to 1.5 m tall, growing in dense
bunches with many stems; stems pubescent, the hairs short; leaf blades lanceolate to occasion-
ally ovate, pubescent, at least on upper surface; inflorescence racemose to very narrowly pan-
iculate; heads 6–11 mm high (including pappus)–among the largest heads of any nc TX GOLD-
ENROD ; involucres to 6.3 mm high; achenes glabrous. Prairies; Post Oak Savannah w to
Panhandle and Edwards Plateau. Sep–Oct. [S. petiolaris var. angustata (Torr. & A. Gray) A. Gray]

var. angustata (Torr. & A. Gray) A. Gray, (narrow), was recognized by Taylor and Taylor (1984);
they indicated it is more common in e TX but occasional further w; while we have seen no nc
TX material of this variety, Hatch et al. (1990) cited vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) and
Nesom (1990d) cited Cooke, Grayson, Palo Pinto, and Parker cos.; we are following Nesom
(1990d), Kartesz (1994), and Jones et al. (1997) in lumping var. angustata with the more common
var. petiolaris. Taylor and Taylor (1984) separated the 2 varieties as follows:
                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS              413




                                                                        Solidago patula var. strictula [HEA]
                             Solidago odora [GLE ]




 Solidago nitida [BT3]
                             Solidago petiolaris [BB2]                      Solidago radula [BB2]




Solidago rigida [BB2]    Solidago rugosa var. aspera [BB2]            Solidago rugosa var. rugosa [BB2]
414   ASTERACEAE/SOLIDAGO

1. Leaf blades prominently sticky or resinous, lower surface glabrous; phyllaries glandular-dotted,
   essentially glabrous                                                                                var. angustata
1. Leaf blades scarcely or not at all sticky or resinous, lower surface and main veins ± hairy with
   spreading hairs; phyllaries minutely hairy with hairs often sticky, but sometimes glabrous           var. petiolaris

Solidago radula Nutt., (rough), ROUGH GOLDENROD. Plant 0.4–1.2 m tall; stems pubescent; inflo-
rescence paniculate, dense to open, with long floriferous branches with small (< 1 cm long) el-
liptic leaves on their lower portions; heads not secund in the field, but often appearing so when
pressed; involucres to 5.5 mm high; achenes short-hairy. Dry bluffs, upland xeric sites; e TX w to
Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov.

Solidago rigida L., (rigid, stiff), STIFF GOLDENROD, RIGID GOLDENROD. Plant variable, to 1.6 m tall;
basal leaves with long conspicuous petioles; middle stem leaves sessile or nearly so; leaf blades
narrowly ovate to ovate, usually densely pubescent; inflorescence flat-topped, dense; heads
large, the involucres 5–9 mm high, the phyllaries multinerved; achenes glabrous or nearly so,
ribbed. Prairies; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers. Sep–Oct(–Nov). Sometimes put in the
segregate genus Oligoneuron [as O. rigidum (L.) Small]. [S. rigida var. laevicaulis Shinners, S.
rigida var. glabrata E.L. Braun, S. rigida subsp. glabrata (E.L. Braun) S.B. Heard & J.C. Semple, S.
rigida subsp. humilis (Porter) S.B. Heard & J.C. Semple] We are following Jones et al. (1997) in
not recognizing infraspecific taxa in this species. Heard and Semple (1988) divided this species
into three subspecies which, according to their range map, all occur in nc TX. Their key divided
the subspecies as follows:

1. Outer series phyllaries glabrous; leaves and stems glabrous to somewhat hispid                     subsp. glabrata
1. Outer series phyllaries pubescent; leaves and stems hispid to densely so.
   2. Inner series phyllaries conspicuously pubescent, often linear; plants usually short (0.3–0.7 m)
      but may be taller; capitulescence compact; pubescence of leaves and stems fine and very
      dense (> 50 hairs/mm3)                                                                            subsp. humilis
   2. Inner series phyllaries glabrate to very sparsely pubescent, oblong and bluntly rounded; plants
      more robust (0.6–1.4 m) with loose, open capitulescence; pubescence coarsely hispid (< 50
      hairs/mm3)                                                                                         subsp. rigida

Solidago rugosa Mill., (rugose, wrinkled), ROUGH -LEAF GOLDENROD, WRINKLED GOLDENROD.
Plant usually < 1 m tall; stems pubescent; leaf blades serrate, the lower surface with long hairs;
panicle triangular in outline, the branches recurved; heads secund; involucres ca. 4 mm high;
achenes short-hairy. Roadside ditches, along streams, moist sites in oak-hickory forests. Sep–
Nov. We are following Taylor and Taylor (1984), Gandhi and Thomas (1989), and Jones et al.
(1997) in treating the following infraspecific taxa as varieties. Kartesz (1994) recognized them as
subspecies.

1. Leaf blades broadly lanceolate to ovate, with pronounced rugose-venation on lower surface              var. aspera
1. Leaf blades lanceolate, without pronounced rugose-venation on lower surface                            var. rugosa

var. aspera (Aiton) Fernald, (rough), CELTIS-LEAF GOLDENROD. Included based on citation of veg-
etational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX. [S. aspera Aiton, S. celtidifolia
Small, S. rugosa var. celtidifolia (Small) Fernald, S. rugosa subsp. aspera (Aiton) Cronquist]

var. rugosa. HARSH GOLDENROD, ROUGH -LEAF GOLDENROD. Fannin, Henderson, Hopkins, and
Lamar cos. on e edge of nc TX; mainly se and e TX.

Solidago speciosa Nutt. var. rigidiuscula Torr. & A. Gray, (sp.: showy; var.: somewhat rigid), PRAI-
RIE GOLDENROD, NOBLE GOLDENROD. Stems usually pubescent at least above; leaf blades nar-
rowly elliptic to elliptic, entire or nearly so, glabrate; inflorescence a narrow dense panicle; in-
volucres ca. 6 mm high; achenes glabrous. Sandy prairies; Henderson, Kaufman, Jack, and
                                                                                          SOLIVA /ASTERACEAE      415

Montague, cos., also Navarro and Palo Pinto cos. (Mahler 1988); e TX w to West Cross Timbers.
(Jun–) Sep–Oct. [S. rigidiuscula (Torr. & A. Gray) Porter]

Solidago ulmifolia Muhl. ex Willd. var. microphylla A. Gray, (sp.: with leaves like Ulmus—elm;
var.: small-leaved), ELM-LEAF GOLDENROD. Plant 0.4–1.5 m tall; stems glabrous; basal rosette ab-
sent; leaf blades ovate, toothed, essentially glabrous; lower inflorescence branches long, florifer-
ous apically; heads secund; involucres 2.5–5 mm high; achenes short-hairy, ribbed. Sandy soils,
roadsides, openings in woodlands, drier upland sites; Grayson and Lamar cos., also Dallas,
Denton, Fannin, Hunt, Kaufman, Montague, Tarrant, and Wise cos. (Taylor & Taylor 1984); e TX
w to West Cross Timbers and sc TX. (Jul–)Sep–Oct(–Nov), Taylor and Taylor (1984) indicated S.
ulmifolia begins blooming in summer and is often finished flowering before some of the later
flowering species begin. [S. delicatula Small, S. microphylla (A. Gray) Engelm. ex Small]

Solidago altiplanities C.E.S. Taylor & J. Taylor, (high plains), HIGH PLAINS GOLDENROD, occurs in
OK just across the Red River from Clay Co.; it also occurs in the Plains Country of TX. It would
key to S. odora in the above key but can be distinguished by its erect branches (vs. recurved
apically), conical inflorescences (vs. pyramidal), and larger leaves to 9 cm long (vs. 5 cm or less)
and not punctate.
Solidago sempervirens L., (evergreen), SEASIDE GOLDENROD. Two varieties, var. mexicana (L.)
Fernald and var. sempervirens, are cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), but
according to Taylor and Taylor (1984) occur only in se TX to the s of nc TX; C. Taylor (pers.
comm.) indicated that they do not occur close to nc TX. The species can be distinguished by the
primary stems and leaves usually glabrous; the inflorescence racemose or paniculate, pubes-
cent; a rosette of linear-lanceolate leaves; and linear to narrowly lanceolate, entire stem leaves.

                SOLIVA BURWEED, PIQUANTE, STICKERWEED, STICKERS
Low growing annuals with short stems (to only ca. 15 cm tall) or nearly stemless; leaves alter-
nate, often crowded; leaf blades 1–3-pinnatifid; heads sessile in clusters of leaves, ca. 3–8 mm
wide, apparently only of disk flowers; outer flowers pistillate, without corollas; inner disk flow-
ers functionally staminate with minute 4-toothed whitish or green-translucent corollas;
achenes flattened, with wings or ± wing-like lateral appendages, tipped by the persistent spine-
like style, conspicuously hairy to glabrous apically; pappus absent.

AA South American genus of 8 species. Easily recognized by the spine-like styles which make
Soliva species painfully noxious weeds, similar in effect to Cenchrus (SANDBURS). The segregate
genus Gymnostyleshas been recognized by some (Tutin 1976; Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997).
However, the differences used to distinguish it from Soliva seem minute and we are following
Cronquist (1980), Gandhi and Thomas (1989), Bremer (1994), and Arriagada and Miller (1997)
in retaining all the species in Soliva. (Named for Dr. Salvador Soliva, 18th century physician to
the Spanish court and botanist at the Royal Botanic Garden, Madrid, where he studied medici-
nally useful plants—Arriagada & Miller 1997) (tribe Anthemideae)
REFERENCES : Cabrera 1949; Tutin 1976; Cronquist 1980; Ray 1987; Gandhi & Thomas 1989;
Arriagada & Miller 1997.

1. Achenes 2.5–4 mm wide, with only short hairs; wings (lateral appendages) of achenes broad,
   thin, smooth, without raised lines, conspicuously indented toward lower half forming 2 basal
   lobes; lateral pinnae of leaves palmately divided; heads scattered, not clustered at base of plant;
   plants caulescent                                                                                     S. pterosperma
1. Achenes 1–2 mm wide, conspicuously long-hairy at tip; wings (lateral appendages) of achenes
   thick, only slightly wing-like, with conspicuous raised lines running across the wings, not indented;
   lateral pinnae of leaves not palmately divided (either pinnately divided or not further divided);
   heads mostly clustered near base of plant; plants ± acaulescent.
416   ASTERACEAE/SONCHUS

  2. Lateral pinnae of leaves usually not further divided; lateral projections of achenes with raised
     lines nearly to apex, with 2 divergent acute awns, projections, or shoulders at apex of achene,
     1 on each side of the spine-like style                                                                S. stolonifera
                                                                                                                        a
  2. Lateral pinnae of leaves pinnately divided; lateral projections of achenes ± smooth in distal
     1/3, without any apical awns, projections, or shoulders near the spine-like style                         S. mutisii

Soliva mutisii Kunth, (for Jose Celastino Bruno Mutis y Bosio, 1732–1808, Spanish physician and
botanist of Madrid), BUTTON BURWEED, SMOOTH-STICKERS. Heads clustered in basal rosette. This
species, not known from nc TX, is included in the key. It is widespread in se and e TX and is to
be expected in nc TX. Mar–Apr. Native of South America. I

Soliva pterosperma (Juss.) Less., (winged seed), LAWN BURWEED, STICKERS , JO-JO WEED). Much
branched, small, mat-forming or ascending annual herb to 15 cm tall; leaves small (1–3.5 cm
long), usually tri-pinnatifid; heads scattered, not clustered at very base; corollas of central flow-
ers ca. 1.6 mm long; achenes ca. 3.2 mm long, 2.5–4 mm wide, with broad lateral wings indented
toward lower half forming basal lobes, glabrous apically, with a sharp, spinose, 1.5–2 mm long,
persistent style and in addition a pair of spinulose projections ca. 1 mm long. Collected from
soccer field near Arlington, Tarrant Co. (1995), possibly spread by atheletic shoes; also a lawn
weed in se and e TX. Apr–May. Native of South America. Ray (1987) and Kartesz (1994) treated
S. pterosperma as a synonym of S. sessilis Ruiz & Pav. We are following Cronquist (1980), Gandhi
and Thomas (1989), and Jones et al. (1997) in recognizing it as a separate species. I

Soliva stolonifera (Brot.) Loudon, (bearing stolons), TRAILING-STICKERS. Stoloniferous, ± acaules-
cent; leaves to 3 cm long and 1 cm wide; heads solitary per node; corollas of central flowers 1.8 mm
long; styles of pistillate flowers to ca. 2 mm long; achenes ca. 2 mm long and 1.7 mm wide. Lawn
weed; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se
and e TX. Mar–Apr. Native of South America. [Gymnostylesstolonifera (Brot.) Tutin] I

                                        SONCHUS SOW-THISTLE
Ours annuals with taproot, glabrous or with glandular-pubescent peduncles and upper stems;
sap milky; stem leaves auricled-clasping, the blades obovate to oblong or ovate-lanceolate,
coarsely or spiny-toothed or lobed; heads small, corymbose; phyllaries narrow, green, in several
rows, the outer successively shorter; flowers all ligulate; corollas yellow; achenes flattened, 2–3
mm long; pappus of white, hair-like bristles 5–9 mm long.

AA genus of 62 species native from Eurasia to Australasia and tropical Africa. (Greek: sonchos,
ancient name used for a prickly plant) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Boulos 1972–74, 1976; Vuilleumier 1973.

1. Leaves stiff and painfully prickly when grasped; leaf auricles (lobe-like extensions on both sides
   at base) rounded, sometimes made irregularly so by prominent, spiny teeth; mature achenes
   with several nerves but not wrinkled-roughened                                                               S. asper
1. Leaves softer, not painfully prickly when grasped; leaf auricles triangular or triangular-lanceolate,
   pointed, as well as sharp-toothed; mature achenes with several nerves and cross wrinkled-
   roughened                                                                                                S. oleraceus

Sonchus asper (L.) Hill, (rough), PRICKLY SOW-THISTLE, ACHICORIA DULCE. Stems 0.1–1(–1.5) m tall;
corolla tubes longer than the ligules; nerves of achenes evident. Gardens, roadsides, disturbed
areas; nearly throughout TX. Mar–Jun, sporadically all year. Native of Eurasia. I

Sonchus oleraceus L., (of the vegetable garden, a potherb used in cooking), COMMON SOW-
THISTLE. Similar to S. asper, but less prickly and often more glaucous; corolla tubes ca. equaling
the ligules; nerves of achenes evident to obscure. Same habitats and flowering period as S. asper;
less common than S. asper, but widespread in TX. Native of Eurasia. I
                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS          417




Solidago speciosa var. rigidiuscula [BB2]


                                            Solidago ulmifolia var. microphylla [HEA]




                 Soliva mutisii [HEA]                                Soliva pterosperma [MAR]




                Soliva stolonifera [HEA]                              Sonchus asper [REE]
418   ASTERACEAE/TARAXACUM

                                      TARAXACUM DANDELION
Small perennials, commonly behaving as winter annuals, with coarse taproot; sap milky; leaves
all in a basal rosette, the blades oblong-lanceolate, coarsely toothed to deeply pinnately lobed;
scapes hollow, ± pubescent, 4–30(–50) cm tall; heads solitary, terminal, large; phyllaries green,
the outer short and ± curved-spreading or reflexed, the inner long, erect; flowers all ligulate; co-
rollas yellow; achenes with beak 0.5–4 times as long as the body; beak tipped with parachute-
like pappus of numerous capillary bristles; achenes with their pappuses in a conspicuous, eas-
ily disrupted, ball-like arrangement.

AA genus of 60 species of the n temperate zone and temperate South America including some
cosmopolitan weeds. Apomixis and polyploidy have made the taxonomy of this group exceed-
ingly complex. The name DANDELION comes from the French: dent de lion, tooth of the lion,
apparently in reference to the leaf shape (Tveten & Tveten 1993). Some authors (e.g., Hatch et al.
1990) lump the following 2 very similar species. (Persian: talkh chakok, bitter herb, through
medieval Latin tarasacon) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1949a; Vuilleumier 1973.

1. Mature achenes red or purplish red or brownish red; tips of some of the inner phyllaries with a
   low knob or blunt ridge on back (visible only on living plants, sometimes quite obscure); leaf
   blades typically deeply lobed for their whole length, the terminal lobe usually not larger than
   the lateral lobes                                                                                 T. laevigatum
1. Mature achenes greenish tan or brownish or straw-colored; tips of inner phyllaries all flat; leaf
   blades usually less deeply lobed, the terminal lobe usually larger than the lateral lobes            T. officinale

Taraxacum laevigatum (Willd.) DC., (smooth), RED-SEED DANDELION. Terminal lobe of leaf blades
usually triangular with straight or concave, rarely convex, sides. In lawns, disturbed areas, and
under trees in towns; Bell, Dallas, Denton, Hopkins, Kaufman, and McLennan cos., also Brown
Co. (HPC); widespread in TX. Dec–Jun, sporadically to Nov, often drying up and disappearing
during summer heat. Native of Europe and w Asia. [T. erythrospermum Andrz. ex Besser] I

Taraxacum officinale F.H. Wigg., (medicinal), COMMON DANDELION. Terminal lobe of leaf blades
rounded-triangular with convex sides. Same habitats, flowering, and growth habits as T.
laevigatum; throughout TX. Native of Eurasia. A cosmopolitan weed nearly throughout the
temperate zone. I

                      TETRAGONOTHECA NERVERAY, SQUAREHEAD
Herbaceous perennials; leaves opposite, distinct or connate-perfoliate, the blades deltoid to ob-
long; heads large, 2–4 cm broad (including ligules); phyllaries apparently in 2 series; outer se-
ries 4(–5) foliaceous, conspicuous, to 14 mm long and 9 mm wide; inner series (actually bracts
of receptacle) 6–15, small, each subtending a ray flower; ray flowers pistillate, fertile, with
ligules conspicuous, yellow, often with some reddish or brown venation; disk flowers numer-
ous, perfect, fertile, the corollas yellow, sometimes with dark stripes; achenes 4-angled; pappus
of scales or absent.

AA genus of 4 species of the se United States. (Greek: tetragonos, four-angled, and thece, a case,
from the shape of the involucre) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCE: Turner & Dawson 1980.

1. Leaf blades toothed, usually very broad, the upper leaves often broadest, or at least very broad at
   base, very conspicuously connate-perfoliate, to 11 cm wide; stems (0.3–)0.6–1.2 m tall; in sandy
   habitats in n part of nc TX                                                                         T. ludoviciana
1. Leaf blades pinnatifid, usually narrow, the upper leaves usually not broadest near base, incon-
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        419




Sonchus oleraceus [REE]                     Taraxacum laevigatum [BB1]                    Taraxacum officinale [REE]




                                                                                    Tetragonotheca ludoviciana [HEA]




                     Tetragonotheca texana [HEA]                                        Tetraneuris linearifolia [IPL]
420   ASTERACEAE/TETRANEURIS

  spicuously connate-perfoliate, to 4.5 cm wide, usually much less; stems 0.2–0.5(–0.7) m tall; in
  calcareous habitats in s part of nc TX                                                                  T. texana

Tetragonotheca ludoviciana (Torr. & A. Gray) A. Gray ex Hall, (of Louisiana), SAWTOOTH
NERVERAY. Leaf blades ovate to oblong, 5–7(–20) cm long, prominently toothed; ray flowers ca.
10, the ligules to 14 mm long; achenes ca. 4 mm long. Sandy woodlands; Denton, Parker, and
Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX. May–Aug.

Tetragonotheca texana Engelm. & A. Gray ex A. Gray, (of Texas), PLATEAU NERVERAY, SQUARE-BUD
DAISY. Leaf blades pinnatifid, narrowly ovate to elliptic or oblong in outline, 3–10 cm long. Cal-
careous soils, uplands; s Blackland Prairie (Mahler 1988) s to Edwards Plateau and s TX. Apr–Sep.

                                              TETRANEURIS
Small annuals or perennials, ± soft-pilose or woolly-pubescent to glabrate; leaves basal or
cauline, alternate, or subopposite, simple, the blades entire or few-lobed, linear to oblanceolate
with petiolar base, minutely resin-dotted; heads terminal, rather large, long-peduncled, solitary;
ray flowers pistillate, fertile; ligules deep yellow or orangish yellow with brown-red lines be-
neath, toothed at tip, reflexed and persistent in age and becoming almost whitish; disk corollas
perfect, fertile, orangish yellow; pappus scales awn-tipped.

AA New World genus of ca. 11–15 species; it is a segregate of Hymenoxysand has sometimes
been treated in that genus (e.g., Karis & Ryding 1994; Mabberley 1997). We are following Kartesz
(1994), Jones et al. (1997), J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997), and Bierner and Jansen (1998) in recog-
nizing the genus. A molecular study by Bierner and Jansen (1998) showed Tetraneuris to be a
monophyletic clade and supported its recognition as a separate genus. (Greek: tetra, four, and
neura , cord or nerve) (tribe Helenieae, sometimes lumped into Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Seeligmann & Alston 1967; Bierner & Jansen 1998.

1. Annuals with branched, conspicuously leafy stems; ray flowers with ligules 5–10 mm long;
   phyllaries 2.5–4(–4.5) mm long                                                                     T. linearifolia
1. Perennials with basal or nearly basal leaves only, the flowering stalks (= peduncles) apparently
   unbranched, very scapose in appearance; ray flowers with ligules 8–22 mm long; phyllaries 4.5–
   6 mm long                                                                                             T. scaposa

Tetraneuris linearifolia (Hook.) Greene, (linear-leaved). Plant to ca. 40(–60) cm tall; stems rang-
ing from heavily pilose to glabrate; rosette leaves soon deciduous, with blades oblanceolate to
linear-lanceolate, entire to few-lobed; cauline leaves persistent, with blades narrowly linear, 3–
6(–8) cm long, 3–10 mm wide; heads on naked peduncles above the leaves; ray flowers variable
in number, 6–22; achenes ca. 2 mm long; pappus scales ca. 2 mm long. Prairies, in calcareous
clay or rocky soils; nearly throughout TX. Mar–May, re-branching and producing additional
smaller heads to Jul. [Hymenoxys linearifolia Hook.]

Tetraneuris scaposa (DC.) Greene, (with scapes), PLAINS YELLOW DAISY, YELLOW PAPER-FLOWER,
FOUR-NERVE DAISY. Plant 10–30+ cm tall; stems densely to slightly pilose; leaf blades linear to
linear-lanceolate, entire to with a few short lobes, 2–10 cm long, 1.5–9(–11) mm wide; petioles
0.5–1.5 mm wide, with clasping base; axils densely long hairy; heads solitary on naked scapes;
ray flowers 12–31; achenes 2–3.5 mm long; pappus scales 1–ca. 3 mm long. Gravelly or rocky
prairies on limestone; in nc TX mainly Grand Prairie, also Dallas Co. (Correll & Johnston 1970);
nc TX s and w to s TX and Trans-Pecos. Mar–May, sporadically through summer, often repeat-
ing in Sep–Oct. [Hymenoxys scaposa (DC.) K.L. Parker] The leaves are dotted with thin granules
of a resin-like substance which gives them a bitter taste (Ajilvsgi 1984). The common name
YELLOW PAPER-FLOWER is probably derived from the tendency of the rays to remain on the
heads long after maturity, eventually turning almost white.
                                                                                       THELESPERMA/ASTERACEAE           421

Tetraneuris turneri (K.L. Parker) K.L. Parker, (for Billie Lee Turner, 1925–, botanist at Univ. of
TX), cited for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), apparently occurs only to the s
of nc TX. It is a perennial with leaves mostly basal, phyllaries 5.5–8.5 mm long, and petioles 2–6
mm wide. [Hymenoxysturneri K.L. Parker]

                                    THELESPERMA GREENTHREAD
Perennial (rarely annual) herbs; leaves opposite, compound or deeply lobed, the segments linear-
lanceolate to filiform; heads terminal on naked peduncles, solitary or corymbose, large; phyllar-
ies in 2 series, the outer phyllaries herbaceous, the inner hyaline- or yellow-margined, basally
fused for 1/4–1/2 their length; ray flowers with ligules yellow or golden yellow or ray flowers
absent; disk corollas unequally lobed, yellow with reddish brown veins to dark reddish brown;
achenes linear to linear-oblong, 2–7 mm long; pappus of 2(–3) awns or minute or absent.

AA genus of 15 species native to w North America and s South America; similar in appearance
to and sometimes confused with Coreopsis; however, Thelesperma has the inner phyllaries ba-
sally united for 1/4 to 1/2 their length and the disk corolla lobes often linear, while Coreopsis
has the phyllaries all separate or nearly so and the disk corolla lobes triangular to ovate. (Greek:
thele, nipple, and sperma, seed, in reference to the papillose achenes) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1950a; Alexander 1955; Greer 1997.
1. Ray flowers present.
   2. Corollas of disk flowers dark reddish brown.
      3. Outer phyllaries 3–12 mm long, usually at least 1/2 as long as inner phyllaries; leaves ±
         evenly distributed on stem                                                                           T. filifolium
      3. Outer phyllaries very small, usually 1–2 mm long, < 1/4 as long as the inner phyllaries; leaves
         mostly in a rosette and on basal 1/3 of stem                                                      T. ambiguum
   2. Corollas of disk flowers yellow (veins can be reddish brown).
      4. Leaves on upper 1/3 of stem (and sometimes most leaves) with only 1–3 narrow divisions;
         pappus absent or of minute tooth-like awns; disk corollas with shallowly lobed limb (to ca.
         1/5 limb length)                                                                              T. simplicifolium
      4. All leaves much divided with many narrow divisions; pappus of well-developed retrorsely
         barbed awns 0.5–2 mm long; disk corollas with deeply lobed limb (1/2–3/4 limb length)
                                                                                                              T. filifolium
1. Ray flowers absent.
   5. Corollas of disk flowers reddish brown; leaves mostly on basal 1/3 of stem                           T. ambiguum
   5. Corollas of disk flowers yellow (veins can be reddish brown); leaves often ± evenly distributed
      on stem or sometimes mostly on basal 1/2                                                      T. megapotamicum

Thelesperma ambiguum A. Gray, (ambiguous). Perennial 22–50 cm tall; ray flowers usually
present, yellow, occasionally absent; disk corollas deeply lobed. Open limestone areas; mainly s
1/2 of TX, possibly to sw part of nc TX. Summer–fall. [T. megapotamicumvar. ambiguum (A.
Gray) Shinners]

Thelesperma filifolium (Hook.) A. Gray, (thread-leaved), GREENTHREAD , THREAD -LEAF
THELESPERMA. Annual or short-lived perennial blooming the first year, 20–70 cm tall; ray corol-
las with ligules yellow or golden yellow, sometimes with reddish tinge near base, ca. 9–22 mm
long, 9–17 mm wide, 3-lobed at apex; disk corollas yellow or reddish brown; achenes 3.5–6.5 mm
long. Prairies, roadsides, and disturbed areas. Apr–Jun, sporadically to Sep.

1. Plants 25–70 cm tall; ray corollas with ligules golden yellow; outer phyllaries usually > 1/2 as long
   as inner; widespread in nc TX                                                                              var. filifolium
1. Plants 20–30(–40) cm tall; ray corollas with ligules yellow; outer phyllaries ca. 1/2 as long as inner;
   sw margin of nc TX; mainly w part of TX                                                              var. intermedium
422   ASTERACEAE/THYMOPHYLLA

var. filifolium. Blackland Prairie and Grand Prairie; widespread in TX. [T. trifidum (Poir.) Britton]

var. intermedium (Rydb.) Shinners, (intermediate). Usually smaller than var. filifolium. Burnet
Co. (Shinners 1950a) near sw margin of nc TX; mainly Rolling Plains, also Edwards Plateau and
Trans-Pecos. [T. intermedium Rydb.]

Thelesperma megapotamicum (Spreng.) Kuntze, (of the big river), COTA, INDIAN TEA, NAVAJO TEA,
COLORADO GREENTHREAD, RAYLESS THELESPERMA. Perennial 30–75 cm tall, spreading by creep-
ing rootstocks; outer phyllaries 1–2(–3) mm long; ray flowers very rarely present; if so this spe-
cies would key to T. simplicifoliumfrom which it can be distinguished by pappus and disk co-
rolla differences; disk corollas deep or brownish yellow, with deeply lobed limb (lobed 1/2–5/6
limb length); pappus well-developed, of 2 triangular, retrorsely barbed awns 1.5–3 mm long.
Sandy or rocky prairies and roadsides; Clay and Young cos., also Archer Co. (Shinners 1950a); w
margin of nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr–Oct. Reportedly used as a tea by the Pueblo peoples of
Arizona and New Mexico (Kirkpatrick 1992).

Thelesperma simplicifolium A. Gray, (simple-leaved), SLENDER GREENTHREAD. Perennial, gla-
brous and usually glaucous; stems 30–70 cm tall; leaves often few, the plant thus often with a
naked appearance; disk corollas with shallowly lobed limb (to ca. 1/5 its length); pappus of 2
minute tooth-like awns. Limestone outcrops; West Cross Timbers and Lampasas Cut Plain s
and w to w TX. May–Sep. Greer (1997) indicated that T. curvicarpum Melchert, originally de-
scribed as a TX endemic from Burnet and Coleman cos. (Melchert 1963), is “… only a rare achene
form that occurs in populatons of both T. simplicifolium and T. filifolium.” He further sug-
gested, “I therefore feel that T. curvicarpum should no longer be considered a separate species
deserving nomenclatural recognition.”

                      THYMOPHYLLA DOGWEED, FOETID-MARIGOLD
Annual or perennial, aromatic herbs; plants 10–30 cm tall; leaves pinnately divided, opposite or
alternate, often with scattered oil glands; involucres 3–7 mm high; ray flowers with corollas yel-
low to yellowish orange; disk corollas yellow to yellowish orange; x = 8.

AA genus of 17 species native to the sw U.S. and Mexico. It is sometimes placed in Dyssodia
(Jones et al. 1997); we are following Karis and Ryding (1994), Kartesz (1994), and J. Kartesz (pers.
comm. 1997) in treating it separately. (Greek: thymos, thyme, and phyllum, leaf) (tribe Helenieae,
sometimes lumped into Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Johnston 1956; Johnston & Turner 1962; Strother 1969, 1986; Gandhi & Thomas 1984.

1. Phyllaries united up to ca. 1/2 their length, each free phyllary apex with 1 or more linear to ob-
   long glands; leaves opposite                                                                         T. pentachaeta
1. Phyllaries united nearly to apex (only short, ± triangular teeth free); top of the united portion of
   the phyllaries with a ring of oblong to round glands; leaves mostly alternate                            T. tenuiloba

Thymophylla pentachaeta (DC.) Small, (five-bristled), COMMON DOGWEED, PARRALENA. Short-
lived perennial 10–20 cm tall; leaf lobes 5–7, linear, sparsely gland-dotted; peduncles 5–10 cm
long; involucres 4–6 mm high; ray flowers 8–13, the ligules 2–8 mm long, yellow to yellow-
orange; disk corollas dull yellow; achenes 2–3 mm long; pappus of ca. 10 awnless and awned
scales, often alternating. Sandy, often calcareous soils; Brown and Coleman cos. on the w mar-
gin of nc TX s and w to w TX. Mar–Jul, Sep–Nov. [Dyssodia pentachaeta (DC.) B.L. Rob.] The foli-
age has an unpleasant scent if handled (Ajilvsgi 1984).

Thymophylla tenuiloba (DC.) Small var. tenuiloba, (slender-lobed), BRISTLE-LEAF DYSSODIA, TINY-
TIM. Annual or short-lived perennial 10–30 cm tall, sometimes forming dense clumps; leaves
dissected into 7–15 linear lobes; peduncles 3–8 cm long; involucres 5–7 mm high; ray flowers
                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS            423




                                                                         Thelesperma filifolium var. filifolium [BB2]
Tetraneuris scaposa [BB2]         Thelesperma ambiguum [HEA]




Thelesperma megapotamicum [STE]




                                                           Thelesperma simplicifolium [HEA]
424   ASTERACEAE/TOWNSENDIA

with ligules golden yellow to yellow-orange, 4–10 mm long; disk corollas yellow-orange;
achenes 2–3.2 mm long; pappus of 10–12 similar small scales 2–3.4 mm long, each bearing 3–5
awns. Sandy, often calcareous soils; Brown and Burnet cos., also Hamilton Co. (Mahler 1988); se
and e TX w to nc and c TX. May–Oct. [Dyssodia tenuiloba (DC.) B.L. Rob.]

Thymophylla tenuiloba (DC.) Small var. wrightii (A. Gray) Strother, (for Charles Wright, 1811–
1885, TX collector), cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), apparently occurs
only to the s of nc TX, mostly on sandy soils of the coastal plain. This variety can be distin-
guished by its mostly spatulate, entire leaves (sometimes with a few lateral lobes).

                                    TOWNSENDIA EASTER DAISY
AA genus of 25 species native to w North America; some are cultivated as ornamentals.
(Named for D. Townsend, 1787–1858, amateur U.S. botanist from Pennsylvania) (tribe Astereae)
REFERENCES: Larsen 1927; Beaman 1957.

Townsendia exscapa (Richardson) Porter, (without scapes), STEMLESS TOWNSENDIA, EASTER
DAISY. Tufted or matted, appressed-pubescent, dwarf perennial, the woody stems barely out of
the ground; leaves ± in rosettes; leaf blades linear-oblanceolate, 1–5(–8) cm long, 2–6 mm wide,
entire; heads large in relation to plant size, 3–4 cm across, sessile or short-pedunculate; ray flow-
ers 20–40, with ligules white to pinkish or rosy-lavender, often with a darker stripe below,
showy, 12–22 mm long, curling under at night or in age; disk corollas yellow, often pink- or
purple-tipped or -tinged; pappus of barbellate bristles 6–13 mm long. Eroding limestone slopes;
Hamilton, Hood, and Johnson cos., also Bell (Beaman 1957) and Brown (HPC) cos.; Grand Prairie
s and w to w TX. Jan–Apr. This is one of the earliest blooming native wildflowers in nc TX.

                             TRAGOPOGON SALSIFY, GOAT’S-BEARD
Biennial herbs with stout taproot; sap milky; stems 20–80 cm tall; leaves alternate, sessile and
clasping, long and narrow (monocot-like), to 30 cm long, tapered from base to a long, narrow
tip, entire; heads solitary, terminal, large, on swollen peduncles, opening mainly in morning;
flowers all ligulate; phyllaries equaling or longer than corollas, ca. 2.4–4 cm long in flower;
achenes 2–5 cm long including elongate beak; pappus of very conspicuous plumose (= feather-
branched) bristles; achenes with their pappuses in a ball-like arrangement resembling the
infructescence of a giant dandelion.

AA temperate Eurasian and Mediterranean genus of ca. 110 species of taprooted herbs with
monocot-like leaves. While both species occurring in nc TX are diploids, hybridization and
polyploidy are well-documented in the genus; T. miruus Ownbey, an allotetraploid resulting
from hybridization between T. dubius and T. porrifolius, is known from the Pacific northwest
(Ownbey 1950a; Roose & Gottlieb 1976; Soltis & Soltis 1989, 1991; Novak et al. 1991; Soltis et al.
1995). (Greek: tragos, goat, and pogon, beard, in reference to the conspicuous pappus) (tribe
Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1949a; Ownbey 1950a; Vuilleumier 1973; Roose & Gottlieb 1976; Soltis &
Soltis 1989, 1991; Novak et al. 1991; Soltis et al. 1995.

1. Corollas lemon-yellow; phyllaries typically 13 per head (sometimes less on depauperate plants)
                                                                                                        T. dubius
1. Corollas purple; phyllaries ca. 8 per head                                                       T. porrifolius

Tragopogon dubius Scop., (doubtful), GOAT’S-BEARD, WESTERN SALSIFY, NOON-FLOWER. Plant 0.3–1
m tall. Becoming rather common in West Cross Timbers (Mahler 1988); migrating from the Pan-
handle and South Plains e to at least Grayson Co. Apr–Jun. Native of Eurasia. [T. major Jacq.] I
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       425




                                    Thymophylla pentachaeta [HEA]




          Thymophylla tenuiloba var. tenuiloba [HEA]                                Townsendia exscapa [HO1]




Tragopogon dubius [PNW]                Tragopogon porrifolius [PNW]                 Verbesina alternifolia [GLE]
426   ASTERACEAE/VERBESINA

Tragopogon porrifolius L., (with leaves like leek, in the Porrum group of genus Allium), SALSIFY,
VEGETABLE-OYSTER SALSIFY, OYSTERPLANT. Plant 0.4–1 m tall. Reported by Reverchon as “natu-
ralized in gardens” at Dallas in 1903 (Mahler 1988); a single plant found in vacant lot in Univer-
sity Park, Dallas, in 1946; 1977 collection from freeway waste area in downtown Dallas; also ob-
served in Harry S. Moss Park, Dallas (R. May, pers. comm.); also w TX. Apr–Jun. Native of
Eurasia. Cultivated for its edible root (Mabberley 1987). I

        VERBESINA CROWN-BEARD, FLAT-SEED-SUNFLOWER, WINGSTEM
Ours herbaceous annuals or perennials, pubescent; leaves usually alternate, sometimes oppo-
site; leaf blades ovate to deltoid, usually serrate; petioles usually winged, the wings in some spe-
cies extending along the stem; phyllaries in 2 to several series, subequal; ray flowers pistillate,
fertile or infertile, the ligules yellow or in one species white; disk flowers perfect, fertile, the co-
rollas yellow or in one species white; achenes flattened, often winged; pappus of 2 deciduous or
persistent awns or absent.

AA genus of ca. 300 species of trees, shrubs, and herbs of warm areas of the Americas; some
are cultivated as ornamentals. (Name said to be modified from Verbena, reason unknown)
(tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Robinson & Greenman 1899; Coleman 1966, 1968, 1977; Olsen 1979, 1985.

1. Stems not winged; ligules of ray flowers prominently 3-lobed apically, the lobes 1.5–4 mm long;
   plants annuals with taproot; leaf blades usually gray-canescent beneath                                 V. encelioides
1. Stems usually winged, a thin wing of leaf-like tissue extending from the leaves along the stem
   (but not winged in the rare V. lindheimeri and rarely not winged in other species); ligules of ray
   flowers only slightly 3-toothed apically; plants perennials with fibrous or fleshy fibrous roots; leaf
   blades not gray-canescent beneath.
   2. Ray flowers 1–5, the ligules white, ca. 5–10 mm long                                                     V. virginica
                                                                                                                          a
   2. Ray flowers 2–15+, the ligules yellow, ca. 10–30 mm long.
      3. Heads usually many, (10–)20–100 per plant; phyllaries few, soon deflexed (= bent down-
         ward); ray flowers 2–10, the ligules drooping; achenes spreading in all directions forming
         globose heads, some achenes deflexed; known in nc TX only from Dallas and Grayson cos.
                                                                                                            V. alternifolia
      3. Heads solitary–few, usually 1–10(–20) per plant; phyllaries numerous, imbricated, not de-
         flexed; ray flowers 8–15+, the ligules spreading ± horizontally; achenes only slightly spread-
         ing, none deflexed; widespread in nc TX.
         4. Stems winged; leaves mostly alternate, not harshly scabrous or only somewhat so; phyl-
            laries lanceolate to linear-oblong, acute to acuminate apically; widespread in nc TX w to
            East Cross Timbers and in Red River drainage to Cooke Co.                                   V. helianthoides
         4. Stems not winged; leaves mostly opposite (but alternate in head-bearing region), mostly
            harshly scabrous; phyllaries broadly oblong to ovate or obovate, rounded to subacute
            apically; rare in nc TX, found locally only in Lampasas Cut Plain                              V. lindheimerii

Verbesina alternifolia (L.) Britton ex Kearney, (alternate-leaved), WINGSTEM. Stems 1–2(–3) m tall,
usually winged; leaves alternate, the blades lanceolate to elliptic or ovate, coarsely serrate to
subentire; heads numerous in a ± open arrangement; achenes winged. Woods of tributaries;
Dallas and Grayson cos. are the only records located for TX. Sep.

Verbesina encelioides (Cav.) Benth. & Hook.f. ex A. Gray, (resembling Encelia, another genus of
Asteraceae), COWPEN DAISY, GOLDEN CROWNBEARD, FEVERWEED, BUTTER DAISY. Stems 0.1–0.9 m
tall; leaves opposite towards base, tending to alternate upward; leaf blades deltoid to ovate,
toothed; petioles usually winged and auriculate at base; heads 1(–3) at ends of branches, large
and conspicuous; ray flowers 10–15, the ligules ca. 1–2.5 cm long, yellow, showy; achenes usually
                                                                                     VERNONIA/ASTERACEAE        427

winged. Disturbed areas, often in sandy soils; nearly throughout TX. May–Nov. [Ximenesia
encelioides Cav.] The foliage has an unpleasant odor if crushed or touched; Native Americans re-
portedly used the plant in treating skin diseases (Ajilvsgi 1984).

Verbesina helianthoides Michx., (resembling Helianthus—sunflower), GRAVELWEED
CROWNBEARD. Stems 0.5–1.2 m tall; leaves alternate, the blades lanceolate to narrowly ovate, ser-
rate; heads usually few in a compact arrangement; achenes winged. Disturbed areas; sandy
woods; e TX w to East Cross Timbers, in Red River drainage to Cooke Co. May–Jun.

Verbesina lindheimeri B.L. Rob. & Greenm., (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1809–1879, Ger-
man-born TX collector), LINDHEIMER’S CROWNBEARD. Stems (0.2–)0.4–0.6(–1) m tall, not winged;
leaf blades ovate-deltoid, cuneate basally; heads few; achenes winged. Juniper-oak woodlands,
shaded slopes, on limestone; Coryell Co., also Bell (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997) and Burnet
(Balcones Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife Refuge, C. Sexton, pers. comm.) cos.; endemic to Lampasas
Cut Plain and e part of Edwards Plateau. Late summer–fall. E

Verbesina virginica L., (of Virginia), FROSTWEED , ICEPLANT , WHITE CROWNBEARD, VIRGINIA
CROWNBEARD, RICHWEED, SQUAW-WEED, INDIAN-TOBACCO. Stems 4–5-winged, coarse, to 2 m tall;
leaves alternate; heads numerous in cymose arrangement; ray and disk corollas white; ligules of
ray corollas to 10 mm long. Disturbed woody areas; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and
Edwards Plateau. Aug–Oct. When exposed to the first freezing temperatures of the year, the
stems split and exude a sap with freezes into conspicuous ice formations—hence several of the
common names (Ajilvsgi 1984). The roots were used by Native Americans to relieve cramps,
chills, and fevers (Burlage 1968).

                                        VERNONIA IRONWEED
Ours clump-forming or rhizomatous perennial herbs; leaves cauline, evenly distributed along
the stem, alternate, simple, toothed; heads many, rather small, corymbose; phyllaries herba-
ceous but rather stiff or hard, sometimes purple-tinged, in several rows, strongly imbricated,
the outer successively shorter; ray flowers absent; disk corollas usually purple (rarely white),
deeply lobed, usually more than 12 per head; pappus of many, long, scabrous, white to brown-
ish or purplish hairs, plus a few very small outer scales.

AA genus of ca. 500 species of the Old World tropics and tropical and warm areas of North
America; timber trees to herbs; some medicinally important. Interspecific hybridization is
well-known in Vernonia (Urbatsch 1972; Jones & Faust 1978). The rich purple corollas make
Vernonia species a showy component of the summer flora of ne TX. (Named for William
Vernon, 16-?–1711, English botanist who collected in Maryland) (tribe Vernonieae)
REFERENCES: Gleason 1906, 1922, 1923; Jones 1970, 1982; Faust 1972; Urbatsch 1972; Faust & Jones
1973; King & Jones 1975; Chapmam & Jones 1978; Jones & Faust 1978; Keeley & Jones 1979.

1. Phyllaries appressed-pubescent over the back (= abaxially), white or grayish; leaf blades nar-
   rowly linear, densely white-woolly beneath; stems densely gray-woolly                             V. lindheimerii
1. Phyllaries glabrous or spreading-pubescent, not whitish or grayish; leaf blades narrow to wide,
   not densely white-woolly beneath; stems glabrous to pubescent, but not gray-woolly.
   2. Leaf blades scabrous or pubescent to tomentose on the lower surface, the larger ones linear
      to lanceolate or ovate, not pitted below OR pitted (only in V. texana); upper stem leaves with
      blades of various widths, often wider than 10 mm; widespread in nc TX.
      3. Stems usually with curly, spreading hairs (sometimes short, use lens); leaf blades slightly
         pubescent to tomentose on the lower surface, not pitted, those at mid-stem lanceolate to
         ovate-lanceolate to elliptic, 10–45 mm wide.
         4. Involucres in flower 2–6 mm in diam. at equator; flowers 9–34 per head; leaves almost
            glabrous to with various pubescence beneath; including species widespread in nc TX.
428   ASTERACEAE/VERNONIA

           5. Phyllaries with shiny resiniferous glands; middle phyllaries with tips acute to acumi-
              nate, usually recurved or spreading; hairs on lower leaf surfaces curly; widespread in
              nc TX                                                                                    V. baldwinii
           5. Phyllaries without resiniferous glands; middle phyllaries with tips subacute to obtuse
              or mucronate, appressed, not recurved or spreading; hairs on lower leaf surfaces ap-
              pressed; rare in nc TX, apparently known from a single Blackland Prairie location         V. gigantea
        4. Involucres in flower 5.5–10 mm in diam. at equator; flowers 32–55(–60) per head; leaves
           densely tomentose beneath; on e margin of nc                                                V. missurica
                                                                                                                  a
     3. Stems glabrous except at summit; leaf blades sparsely scabrous-pubescent on the lower
        surface, pitted, those at mid-stem linear to lanceolate, 1–14 mm wide                             V. texana
  2. Leaf blades glabrous, the larger ones linear, with numerous small but conspicuous pits on the
     lower surface (can appear as black dots under low magnification); upper stem leaves with
     blades 3–10 mm wide; in nc TX known only from West Cross Timbers                                  V. marginata

Vernonia baldwinii Torr., (for its discoverer, William Baldwin, 1779–1819, botanist and physician
of Pennsylvania), BALDWIN’S IRONWEED, WESTERN IRONWEED. Plant 40–150 cm tall; middle stem
leaves with blades lanceolate to narrowly ovate, 3.7–17 cm long, 2–6 cm wide. Open woods, low
ground; widespread in TX. Jul–Sep. The bitter foliage apparently prevents herbivory by cattle
and the plant is thus sometimes common in overgrazed pastures (Ajilvsgi 1984).

Vernonia gigantea (Walter) Trel. ex Branner & Coville, (gigantic), TALL IRONWEED. Plant 100–
150(–350) cm tall; middle stem leaves with blades linear-lanceolate to lanceolate or oblan-
ceolate, 10–75 mm wide. Open weedy areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4
(Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990) and locality mapped apparently in e part of nc TX by Urbatsch
(1972); mainly e U.S. to the e of TX. Aug–Nov. [V. altissima Nutt.] Urbatsch indicated that this
species hybridizes with V. missurica and V. baldwinii.

Vernonia lindheimeri A. Gray & Engelm., (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1809–1879, German-
born TX collector), WOOLLY IRONWEED. Plant 25–75 cm tall, clump-forming. Limestone out-
crops; Dallas and Tarrant cos. s and w to Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos, also se TX. Summer.

Vernonia marginata (Torr.) Raf., (margined), PLAINS IRONWEED, NARROW-LEAF IRONWEED. Plant
30–100 cm tall; middle stem leaves with blades broadly linear; upper stem leaves sessile, 3–10
mm wide. Low areas; Palo Pinto and Shackelford cos.; West Cross Timbers s and w to w TX. Jul–
Aug. Avoided by grazing livestock because of its bitter taste (Kirkpatrick 1992).

Vernonia missurica Raf., (of Missouri), MISSOURI IRONWEED. Plant to 150 cm tall; middle stem
leaves with blades lanceolate to narrowly ovate. Open woods, low ground; Henderson and
Lamar cos. on e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e TX. Jul–Oct.

Vernonia texana (A. Gray) Small, (of Texas), TEXAS IRONWEED. Plant 40–150 cm tall; upper leaves
markedly reduced. Sandy woods; Bell, Fannin, Henderson, Lamar, Limestone, and Milam cos.,
also collected at Dallas by Reverchon; mainly se and e TX. Summer.

Two hybrids are also known from nc TX:

Vernonia 3guadalupensis A. Heller [baldwinii 3 lindheimeri ], (for the Guadalupe River area of
the Edwards Plateau). Phyllaries appressed pubescent over the back as in V. lindheimeri, but
differing in having leaf blades gray-green beneath with thin pubescence to nearly glabrous
(versus densely white-woolly beneath in V. lindheimeri). This hybrid is known from several
Dallas Co. specimens, also Bell Co. (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997).

Vernonia 3vultrina Shinners [baldwinii 3 marginata ], (for Buzzards Spring in Dallas, TX).
Leaves glabrous as in V. marginata but differing in the upper stem leaves with petioles 2–3
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     429




Verbesina encelioides [BB1]   Verbesina helianthoides [BB1]
                                                                             Verbesina lindheimeri [HEA]




 Verbesina virginica [BB1]


                                 Vernonia baldwinii [REE]




                                                                              Vernonia lindheimeri [BT3]




 Vernonia gigantea [GLE]         Vernonia marginata [BB2]
430   ASTERACEAE/VIGUIERA

mm long and blades 15–25 mm wide. This hybrid is known only from a top of an apparently
large plant, collected by Reverchon at Buzzards Spring, Dallas (now a residential area).

                                  VIGUIERA GOLDEN-EYE
AA genus of 180 species native to warm and tropical areas of the Americas; a few are culti-
vated as ornamentals. (Named for L.G.A. Viguier, 1790–1867, French physician and botanist)
(tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENES: Blake 1918; Robinson 1977.

Viguiera dentata (Cav.) Spreng., (toothed), SUNFLOWER GOLDEN -EYE. Herbaceous perennial;
leaves opposite below, alternate above; leaf blades ovate or rhombic-ovate, cuneate to truncate,
serrate; phyllaries in 3 series, imbricated, ovate basally, indurate with herbaceous linear tips;
ray flowers 10–12, pistillate, infertile, the ligules yellow, ca. 7–15 mm long, 3–7.5 mm wide; disk
flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas yellow; achenes black or mottled, appressed-pubescent, 3.5–
4 mm long; pappus awns 2, 2.2–2.8 mm long, squamellae (additional small pappus scales) 4,
squarish, fimbriate. Calcareous soils; Bell, Hill, McLennan, and Williamson cos., also Coryell Co.
(Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997); s part of nc TX through Edwards Plateau to Trans-Pecos. Oct–Nov.

                                            WEDELIA
AA genus of 100 species of tropical and warm areas of the world; 4 species are found in the
United States; a number of taxa have sometimes been treated in Zexmenia. (Named for Georg
Wolfgang Wendel, 1645–1721, professor of botany at Jena, Germany) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Turner 1988a, 1992; Strother 1991.

Wedelia texana (A. Gray) B.L. Turner, (of Texas) ORANGE ZEXMENIA, HAIRY WEDELIA, ORANGE
DAISY. Small shrub 0.5–1 m tall; herbage strigose-hispid; leaves opposite, sessile; leaf blades nar-
rowly ovate, usually 5 cm or more long, cuneate basally, coarsely toothed to slightly lobed;
heads long-peduncled, solitary or in a cyme of 3; phyllaries in 2 series; ray flowers pistillate, fer-
tile, the ligules conspicuously yellowish orange; disk flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas similar
in color to ligules of ray flowers; achenes of ray and disk flowers usually 2- or 3-angled, usually
winged; pappus of 2 or 3 short awns subtended by short, hyaline scales. Calcareous soils; Bur-
net Co., also Brown, Comanche (Mahler 1988), and Somervell (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; sw
part of nc TX s through Edwards Plateau to s TX and w to Trans-Pecos. Apr–Nov. [W.
acapulcensis Kunth var. hispida of authors, not (Kunth) Strother,W. hispida of authors, not
Kunth, Zexmenia hispida of authors, not (Kunth) A. Gray ex Small] We are following Jones et
al. (1997) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) for nomenclature of this taxon which has long been
associated with the epithet hispida.

                                XANTHISMA SLEEPY DAISY
AA monotypic genus native to TX, NM, and OK. The common name probably refers to the late
morning expansion of the ray flowers. (Greek: xanthisma, that which dyes yellow) (tribe
Astereae)
REFERENCE: Semple 1974.

Xanthisma texanum DC. subsp. drummondii (Torr. & A. Gray) Semple, (sp.: of Texas; subsp.: for
its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish botanist and collector in North
America), TEXAS SLEEPY DAISY. Glabrous annual 10–75 cm tall; leaves sessile or subsessile, the
blades lanceolate, entire, toothed, or the lower often pinnately lobed; heads rather large, solitary
and terminal on main stem and branches; receptacles with chaffy scales; ray flowers yellow,
expanded from late morning to late afternoon, becoming erect and with tips nearly touching,
the head closed during the night. Sandy open woods, roadsides, and pastures; Hill, Montague,
                                                                           ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       431




          Vernonia missurica [BB2]                                                      Vernonia 3vultrina [BT3]




                                                   Vernonia texana [BT3]




            Viguiera dentata [IVE]                                                            Wedelia texana [USH]




Xanthisma texanum subsp. drummondii [BT3, RBM]   Xanthium spinosum [BB2]             Xanthium strumarium var. canadense [REE]
432   ASTERACEAE/XANTHIUM

and Tarrant cos. w through West Cross Timbers to Panhandle; also Edwards Plateau. May–Oct.
[Xanthisma texanum DC. var. drummondii (Torr. & A. Gray) A. Gray] Burlage (1968) reported
the plant to contain a saponin and to be poisonous. 9

                               XANTHIUM COCKLEBUR, BURWEED
Coarse, monoecious annuals with taproots; leaves alternate; heads small, axillary, nearly sessile,
unisexual; ray flowers absent; staminate heads with 1–3 series of separate phyllaries; disk flow-
ers with minute corollas; anthers 5, separate; pistillate heads with phyllaries united into a
prickly bur or “fruit”; bur completely enclosing 2 flowers which lack corolla and pappus;
achenes 2 per bur.

AA cosmopolitan (now) genus of ca. 3 species with conspicuous, accrescent involucres cov-
ered with hooked prickles used for animal dispersal. A cladistic study by Karis (1995) suggested
that Xanthium is a monophyletic ingroup in a paraphyletic Ambrosia. According to the
VELCRO® Industries homepage (www.velcro.com), in the early 1940s, a Swiss inventor, George
de Mestral, after a walk noticed “cockleburrs” [presumably Xanthium] on his dog and his pants.
He examined the hooked prickles under a microscope and derived the idea for the well-known
two-sided fastener—one side with stiff, cocklebur-like “hooks” and the other side with soft
“loops” like the cloth of his pants. The word velcro comes from the French words velours, velvet,
and croché, hooked. (Greek name of some plant used to dye the hair, from xanthos, yellow)
(tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCES: Millspaugh & Sherff 1919; Rydberg 1922; Löve & Dansereau 1959; Karis 1995.

1. Nodes with a conspicuous, 3-pronged, yellowish spine; bur ca. 1 cm long; leaf blades tapering or
   wedge-shaped at base; rare in nc TX                                                                      X. spinosum
1. Nodes without spines (the only spiny or prickly part of the plant is the bur or “fruit”); bur usually
   (1–)2–3 cm long; leaf blades truncate or cordate at base; widespread in nc TX                         X. strumarium

Xanthium spinosum L., (spiny), SPINY COCKLEBUR, CLOTBUR. Stems 0.3–1(+) m tall; leaves entire or
with a few teeth or lobes, slightly pubescent or glabrate on upper surface, densely silvery-pu-
bescent on lower surface, tapering to a short petiole; bur finely pubescent, with numerous,
hooked prickles ca. 2 mm long. Disturbed and waste places; included based on citation of veg-
etational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), also Brown Co. (J. Stanford, pers. comm.); mainly w
1/2 of TX. Jul–Oct. Introduced, region of origin unclear, probably the Americas. The plant can
cause mechanical injuries; ingestion by pigs can result in toxic symptoms including prostration
and convulsions (Burlage 1968). 9 I

Xanthium strumarium L. var. canadense (Mill.) Torr. & A. Gray, (sp.: of swellings or tumors; var.:
of Canada), COCKLEBUR, COMMON COCKLEBUR, ABROJO. Stems usually 0.4–2 m tall; leaf blades to
15 cm long, ovate to deltoid, suborbicular, or reniform, serrate or with shallow lobes, scabrous;
petioles elongate, to 15 cm long; bur (1–)2–3+ cm long, ca. 1.5 cm in diam., terminated by 2
prominent spines, covered with stiff, hooked prickles ca. 5 mm long; bur and bases of spines
densely pubescent. Disturbed moist areas or sandy soils; throughout TX. Fruiting Jul–Nov.
[Xanthium italicum Moretti] Xanthium strumarium is a very variable taxon questionably di-
visible into infraspecific taxa. Our plants seem to best fit var. canadense. Poisonous and poten-
tially fatal to pigs and other livestock; the poisonous principle is hydroquinone or a diterpenoid
glycoside and occurs in the seeds and seedlings (Sperry et al. 1955; Kingsbury 1964, 1965;
Stephens 1980; Hardin & Brownie 1993). The burs can cause mechanical injury when eaten by
livestock and are sometimes referred to as “porcupine eggs” (Barkley 1986). 9
                                                                      IMPATIENS/BALSAMINACEAE     433

                                            YOUNGIA
AAn Asian genus of ca. 40 species. (Named for William Young, 1742–1785, German-born
American botanist, nurseryman, and gardener) (tribe Lactuceae)
REFERENCES: Babcock & Stebbins 1939; Vuilleumier 1973.

Youngia japonica (L.) DC., (of Japan), JAPANESE-HAWKWEED. Annual herb from taproot; sap
milky; stems 0.1–0.9 m tall; basal leaves pinnatifid, crowded; stem leaves few and reduced; heads
numerous, small, 6–7 mm long including pappus; involucres 3.5–5.7 mm high, glabrous; corol-
las all ligulate, yellow or yellow-orange; achenes 1.5–2.5 mm long, strongly compressed; pappus
of numerous hair-like bristles 2.5–3.5 mm long. Flowerbeds, gardens, weedy areas; Dallas and
Tarrant cos.; also scattered in se and e TX. Oct–Nov. Native of Asia. I

                                             ZINNIA
AA genus of 11 species from the U.S. to Argentina, especially Mexico; herbs and low shrubs
with opposite or whorled leaves and alkaloids; some are cultivated as ornamentals; Z. elegans
Jacq., COMMON ZINNIA, YOUTH-AND-OLD-AGE, was cultivated by the Aztecs. (for Johann Gottfried
Zinn, 1727–1759, German professor of botany at Göttingen known for his botanical work in
Mexico) (tribe Heliantheae)
REFERENCE: Torres 1963.

Zinnia grandiflora (L.) DC., (large-flowered), PLAINS ZINNIA, ROCKY MT. ZINNIA. Low much-
branched perennial 8–22 cm tall; stems from a woody base; leaves opposite, linear, 10–30 mm
long, to ca. 2 mm wide, strigose; heads terminating stems, not much raised above the leaves; in-
volucres 5–8 mm high; phyllaries broadly obtuse and often red-tipped apically; receptacles
chaffy; ray flowers 3–6, pistillate, fertile; ligules to 18 mm long, ovate to orbicular, yellow; disk
flowers perfect, fertile, the corollas red or green, 5-toothed with 1 tooth often larger; chaffy
bracts membranous, enclosing the achenes; ray achenes 3-angled, with lateral awns ± adnate to
ligule or only the tip free, the awn of inner angle minute or absent; disk achenes oblanceolate,
4–5 mm long, with (1–)2(–4) awns or awns absent. Dry calcareous areas; Brown Co.; extreme w
margin of nc TX w to w TX. Summer–fall. m/108


             BALSAMINACEAE TOUCH-ME-NOT FAMILY
AA medium-sized (850 species in 2 genera), mainly Old World tropical family with a few in
temperate regions; they are generally herbs or rarely subshrubs. Hydrocera, native to
Indomalesia, has only a single species. Family name conserved from Balsamina, a genus now
treated as Impatiens (the name Impatiens was published earlier and thus has priority in terms
of nomenclature). (Possibly from Greek: balsamon, a fragrant gum, or from ancient Arabic:
balassam, for some species of Impatiens) (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs with translucent watery stems, alternate simple leaves,
showy bilaterally symmetrical flowers with a conspicuous spur, and explosively dehiscing
capsules.
REFERENCES: Rydberg 1910; Wood 1975.

        IMPATIENS TOUCH-ME-NOT, JEWELWEED, BALSAM, SNAPWEED
AOurs erect annual herbs; leaves alternate, simple; sepals 3, 2 small, 1 large and conspicuous,
petal-like, saccate, and with a long nectar spur; petals apparently 3, the 2 laterals 2-lobed; anthers
5, united around stigma; pistil 1; ovary superior; fruit an explosively dehiscent, 5-valved capsule.

A genus of 849 species of tropical and n temperate areas, especially India. Many Impatiens spe-
cies are used as ornamentals (e.g., I. walleriana Hook.f.—BUSY-LIZZIE, SULTAN’S-FLOWER). Several
434   BASELLACEAE/ANREDERA

Middle Eastern and African species were used as a source of dyes (red, yellow, or black)
(Baumgardt 1982). (Latin: impatiens, impatient, alluding to the explosive release of the seeds
when the capsule is touched)
REFERENCE: Rust 1977.

1. Flowers of various colors, with extremely narrow opening; capsules densely pubescent; stems
   usually pubescent; petioles 0.5–2 cm long, often with conspicuous glands                       I. balsamina
1. Flowers orange with crimson spots, with obvious, open, funnel-like shape; capsules glabrous;
   stems glabrous; petioles 0.5–10 cm long, without glands                                         I. capensis

Impatiens balsamina L., (balsamic, similar to balsam), GARDEN BALSAM, ROSE BALSAM. Stems to
ca. 0.75 m tall; leaf blades elliptic-lanceolate to lanceolate, 5–10(–15) cm long, 1–3 cm wide, ser-
rate; petioles 1–2 cm long; flowers axillary, solitary or in groups of 2–3, large and showy, ca. 25–
50 mm across, of various colors including white to pink, red, or yellow, often spotted, often
double-flowered; capsules 1–3 cm long. Cultivated; escaped to a creek bottom in Dallas Co. ?–
Nov. Native of Asia. The flowers have been used to dye fingernails (Mabberley 1997). I

Impatiens capensis Meerb., (of the Cape of Good Hope), SPOTTED TOUCH-ME-NOT, JEWELWEED,
LADY’S-EARRINGS. Plant glabrous; stems to 1.5 m tall, succulent; leaves ovate to ovate-elliptic or
elliptic, to 10(–13) cm long and to 8 cm wide (often much smaller), crenate, mucronate; petioles
0.5–10 cm long, those on flowering branches often rather short; flowers usually 2–4 on axillary
inflorescences, pendulous on pedicels to ca. 20 mm long; flowers of 2 kinds, some large and
showy, others small and cleistogamous; larger flowers 20–30 mm long; large sepal spurred, the
spur ca. 6–25 mm long and bent backward parallel to the body of the sepal; stamens 5, pistil 1,
ovary superior; capsules ca. 2 cm long. Stream bottom woods; Fannin and Lamar cos. in Red
River drainage; mainly e TX. May–Jul. [I. biflora Walter] The common name is derived from the
fruits being explosively dehiscent when touched or disturbed. The sap is reported by some to
prevent POISON-IVY dermatitis when rubbed on the skin (McGregor 1986). Despite the specific
epithet, this species is native to North America including e TX. Austin (1975) considered this
species adapted for pollination by ruby-throated hummingbirds (Archilochus colubris).


      BASELLACEAE MADEIRA-VINE OR BASELLA FAMILY
AA very small (20 species in 4 genera), mainly tropical and warm area, especially American
family of climbing vines containing betalain pigments; some are cultivated as ornamentals.
The family is thought to be related to the Portulacaceae. Family name from Basella, MALABAR-
NIGHTSHADE, a genus of 5 species of Madagascar, e Africa, and one pantropical. (Latinized ver-
sion of the Malabar name for the plant) (subclass Caryophyllidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is an introduced, unarmed, non-ten
driled, herbaceous vine with alternate, simple, entire, broadly ovate leaves and small white
flowers on axillary spike-like racemes or panicles.
REFERENCES: Wilson 1932; Bogle 1969; Sperling & Bittrich 1993; Behnke & Mabry 1994; Nowicke
1996.

                                   ANREDERA MADEIRA-VINE
AA genus of 10–15 species of warm areas of the Americas; a number are cultivated as orna-
mentals. (Derivation of generic name unknown, possibly a personal name)

Anredera cordifolia (Ten.) Steenis, (with heart-shaped leaves), MADEIRA-VINE, MIGNONETTE-VINE.
Twining, glabrous, herbaceous vine to ca. 6 m long, without tendrils or armature; perennial
from a tuber-like root, hardy in nc TX; leaves alternate, simple, entire, broadly ovate, subcordate
to cordate, to ca. 11 cm long, thin-fleshy, petiolate; inflorescence an axillary spike-like raceme or
                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             435




                   Youngia japonica [BR2]                                Zinnia grandiflora [BB2]




Impatiens balsamina [BL1]                                                                      Berberis trifoliolata [POW]




                                            Anredera cordifolia [HEA]




  Impatiens capensis [CO1]                                                                   Nandina domestica [LAM]
436   BERBERIDACEAE/BERBERIS

panicle with 2–4 branches, with numerous, small, usually perfect flowers, 4–30 cm long;
pedicels 1.5–2.5 mm long, with 2 minute bracteoles persistent at tip; 2 larger unwinged
bracteoles slightly shorter than the perianth lobes present immediately below the 5-parted pe-
rianth; perianth to ca. 6 mm wide, white; stamens 5; pistil 1; style 3-divided ca. 1/4–3/4 of way
to base; ovary superior; fruit not seen. Cultivated as an ornamental and escaping; Tarrant and
Williamson cos.; we are not aware of other TX localities. Aug–Oct. Native of tropical South
America. I

This species is often confused with the similar A. baselloides (Kunth) Baill., (resembling
Basella—Malabar nightshade), which differs in having an undivided style and upper bracteoles
with narrowly winged keels and slightly exceeding the perianth in length.


                     BERBERIDACEAE BARBERRY FAMILY
Ours perennial herbs or shrubs; leaves alternate or apparently opposite, simple or compound,
entire, toothed, or lobed; flowers solitary or in racemes or panicles; perianth parts in 3s, all
nearly alike or distinctly differentiated into sepals and petals (1 to several rows of each), the
outer usually falling as or soon after the flowers open, the innermost sometimes with glands or
modified into prominent staminode-like nectaries; perianth sometimes with basal bracts; sta-
mens as many as the petals or twice as many; anthers opening by apical valves or by a longitu-
dinal slit; pistil 1; ovary superior; fruit in ours a berry.

AA medium-sized family of ca. 650 species in 15 genera (Whetstone et al. 1997a); a wide-
spread, but especially n temperate family of trees, shrubs, or perennial herbs; often with alka-
loids; tissues are often colored yellow due to the isoquinoline berberine; many are valued as or-
namentals including Berberis, Mahonia (if segregated), and Nandina. Although the family has
sometimes been split with Podophyllumand related genera recognized as the Podophyllaceae, a
molecular study by Kim and Jansen (1996 [1997]) suggested the Berberidaceae sensu lato is a
monophyletic group related to (sister group of) the Ranunculaceae. (subclass Magnoliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: evergreen shrubs or perennial herbs with compound or
deeply palmately lobed leaves; flower parts in 3sis a good field character for this otherwise ob-
viously dicot family.
REFERENCES: Ernst 1964a; Norwicke & Skvarla 1981; Loconte & Estes 1989; Loconte 1993; Kim
& Jansen 1996 [1997]; Whetstone et al. 1997a.

1. Evergreen shrubs; leaves numerous, with 3 leaflets or 2–3 times pinnately compound, not peltate;
   flowers numerous.
   2. Leaves with 3 leaflets; leaflets with spiny lobe-like teeth                                       Berberis
   2. Leaves 2–3 times pinnately compound; leaflets without spiny teeth                                 Nandina
1. Herbs; leaves 1 or 2 per plant, deeply palmately lobed, peltate; flower 1 per plant              Podophyllum


                                        BERBERIS BARBERRY
AA nearly worldwide genus of ca. 500 species (Whittemore 1997d) of usually spiny shrubs
with alkaloids. Some serve as alternate hosts for cereal rusts; as a result, the sale or transport of
certain species is illegal in the U.S. and Canada; a number are cultivated as ornamentals (e.g., B.
aquifolium Pursh—OREGON GRAPE) and the berries of some species are edible. Some species
were previously segregated as the genus Mahonia. However, species intermediate between Ma-
honia and Berberis (in the narrow sense) are known and recognizing segregate genera does not
seem warranted (Whittemore 1997d). (Latinized from of berberys, Arabic name of the fruit)
REFERENCES: Ahrendt 1961; McCain & Hennen 1982; Whittemore 1997d.

Berberis trifoliolata Moric., (with three leaflets), ALGERITAS, AGARITO, CURRANT-OF-TEXAS .
                                                                         NANDINA /BERBERIDACEAE     437

Densely leafy evergreen shrub to 2 m tall; wood yellow; leaves with 3 leaflets; leaflets narrowly
oblong-lanceolate, blue-gray above, green beneath, with 1–3 pairs of spiny lobe-like teeth re-
sembling those of HOLLY, glabrous; inflorescences of compact, axillary, umbel-like racemes;
flowers small, yellow; perianth of 6–9 ± petal-like sepals, and 6 narrower, longitudinally cupped
petals; anthers opening by apical valves; fruits globose, 8–10 mm in diam., red. Rocky limestone
soils; Bell, Brown, Johnson, Palo Pinto, and Somervell cos., also McLennan and Parker cos.
(Mahler 1988); s and w parts of nc TX s to s TX and w to Trans-Pecos. Late Feb–Mar. This species
is sometimes recognized in the genus Mahonia [as M. trifoliolata (Moric.) Fedde] (e.g., Kartesz
1994). However, we are following Whittemore (1997d) and Jones et al. (1997) in treating it in Ber-
beris. [B. trifoliolata var. glauca (I.M. Johnst.) M.C. Johnst.] Jones et al. (1997) spelled the epithet
trifoliata. According to Correll and Johnston (1970), an excellent jelly can be made from the
fruits. The wood and roots were used as a source of yellow dye by early settlers (Kirkpatrick
1992). The stamens are reported to be touch sensitve; when touched by a pollinating insect, they
spring out throwing pollen onto the pollinator (Wills & Irwin 1961; Kirkpatrick 1992). This spe-
cies was reported to be susceptible to infection by the fungus, Puccinia graminis Pers., black
stem rust of wheat (Whittemore 1997d); however, according to J. Hennen (pers. comm.), it is not
susceptible; the species of Berberis in section Mahonia (sometimes treated as a separate genus)
are not infected by P. graminis; rather they are susceptible to Cumminsiella texana (Holw. &
Long.) Arthur, an autoecious (= requires only 1 host) rust (J. Hennen, pers. comm.). The roots
contain berberine and associated alkaloids and were used in folk medicine; however, in high
concentrations they can cause poisoning (Powell 1988). 9

                  NANDINA SACRED-BAMBOO, HEAVENLY-BAMBOO
AA monotypic genus native from India to Japan; the single species is a much cultivated orna-
mental shrub, especially in Japan; sometimes segregated into the Nandianceae. (Chinese name
meaning plant from the south or from the Japanese name, nanten)
REFERENCE: Whetstone et al. 1997b.

Nandina domestica Thunb., (domesticated, frequently used as a house plant), SACRED-BAMBOO,
HEAVENLY-BAMBOO. Evergreen shrub to ca. 1.5 m tall; leaves 2–3 pinnately compound, 50–100 cm
long; leaflets lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, glabrous, often with reddish coloration; inflores-
cence a panicle to 20 cm long; flowers 3-merous, with whitish or cream-colored perianth 6–8
mm long; stamens 6; anthers opening by a longitudinal slit; fruits 6–9 mm in diam., red. Widely
cultivated and escapes into sandy woods; Grayson Co., also Dallas Co. (E. McWilliams, pers.
comm.) and Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.). May–Jun. Native from India to e Asia. I

                        PODOPHYLLUM MAY-APPLE, MANDRAKE
AA genus of ca. 5 species native to e North America and the Himalayas to e Asia; sometimes
segregated into the Podophyllaceae. (Greek: podos, foot, and phyllon, a leaf, probably referring to
the stout petioles of the radical leaf)
REFERENCES: Swanson & Sohmer 1976; George 1997.

Podophyllum peltatum L., (peltate, shield-shaped), MAY-APPLE, WILD JALAP, AMERICAN-MANDRAKE.
Rhizomatous perennial herb to 50 cm tall; leaves 2 (sometimes 1), appearing opposite at sum-
mit of stem, long-petioled; leaf blades large, to 30 cm or more in diam., typically peltate, subor-
bicular, with 5–9 segments, inconspicuously pubescent beneath; flower solitary, nodding, over-
topped by the leaves; perianth white (rarely rose), of 12–15 broad tepals, the 6 outer shorter (=
sepals) than the inner, falling early, the inner (= petals) 2–3.5 cm long; stamens twice as many as
the petals; anthers opening by a longitudinal slit; fruit an ovoid, many-seeded, fleshy berry 3–5
cm long, yellow to purplish at maturity. Open woods and thickets, sandy soils; e TX w to Hunt
Co. in South Sulphur River drainage (Mahler 1988), locally w in Red River drainage to Grayson
438   BETULACEAE

Co. (Buckner Preserve), and to Kaufman Co. in Trinity River drainage. Late Mar–mid-Apr. The
unripe fruit is toxic but reported to be edible when ripe and is sometimes used to make pre-
serves; all other parts of the plant are toxic, apparently including the seeds of the ripe fruit;
there are over 15 biologically active compounds including the poisonous podophyllin, a bitter
resin containing lignins and flavonols; podophyllin has strong cathartic and antineoplastic
properties. Children have been poisoned by the unripe fruit and poisoning has resulted from
the misuse of medicinal preparations. Eating large quanities of the plant or repeated applica-
tions of the resin to the skin can be fatal; workers handling the rootstocks sometimes develop
dermatitis and conjunctivitis. The plant has long been used medicinally by Native Americans
for warts; recently it has been used against venereal warts and testicular cancer (Muenscher
1951; Kingsbury 1964; Morton 1977; Mabberley 1987; Turner & Szczawinski 1991; Leung & Fos-
ter 1996). A rust fungus (Puccinia podophylli Schwein.) sometimes causes leaf lesions (J.
Hennen, pers. comm.). 9


              BETULACEAE BIRCH OR HAZELNUT FAMILY
Ours monoecious shrubs to small or large trees; leaves alternate, simple, deciduous, short-peti-
oled; leaf blades pinnately straight-veined, serrulate or doubly serrate; stipules deciduous; peri-
anth small or absent; staminate flowers in spreading or drooping catkins (= aments); pistillate
flowers in spike-like or cone-like inflorescences; pistil 1; ovary inferior; fruit a 1-seeded samara
(2-winged) or nutlet (unwinged).

AA small (ca. 125 species in 6 genera (Furlow 1997)), mainly n temperate family of wind-polli-
nated trees and shrubs with some on tropical mountains; species are variously important eco-
nomically for timber, as a source of edible nuts, as ornamentals, and as aids in soil nitrification
and stabilization; the two additional genera not occurring in Texas are the north temperate
Corylus (source of hazelnuts and filberts) and the Asian Ostryopsis. The family was previously
often split into two families, Betulaceae (Alnus and Betula) and Corylaceae (Carpinus, Ostrya,
Corylus, and Ostryopsis); most modern authorities now recognize these groups at the
subfamilial level (Furlow 1997). (subclass Hamamelidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: shrubs or trees with alternate, simple, sharp-toothed leaves,
early deciduous stipules, and male flowers in long catkins; fruits 1-seeded, in cone-like or spike-
like, obviously bracteate infructescences.
REFERENCES: Little 1971; Furlow 1990, 1997; Kubitzki 1993a.

1. Leaves truncate (= as if cut or squared off ) or broadly cuneate (= wedge-shaped) at base; fruits
   winged, subtended by a small (3–8 mm long) bract and grouped with bracts into a cone-like
   structure.
   2. Trees with shaggy, conspicuously exfoliating bark; lower surface of leaves often grayish white,
      densely hairy when young; pistillate inflorescences solitary; bracts 3-lobed, 6–8 mm long,
      papery and eventually deciduous; buds not stalked                                                   Betula
   2. Shrubs or small trees with ± smooth bark; lower surface of leaves green, glabrous or nearly
      so even when young; pistillate inflorescences in groups of 2–3; bracts not lobed, 3–4 mm long,
      becoming woody and persistent; buds stalked                                                         Alnus
1. Leaves rounded to subcordate at base; fruits wingless (but wing-like bract can be present), en-
   closed in or subtended by conspicuous sac-like or 3-lobed, wing-like bracts 8 mm or more long
   (well-developed bracts usually at least 15 mm long), these ± densely clustered together in a
   spike-like inflorescence.
   3. Fruit subtended (not enclosed) by a 3-lobed bract; bark smooth, gray, the trunk appearing like
      rippling muscles; lower surface of mature leaves glabrous except for some hairs in the axils of
      the veins; none of the main side veins near the base of the leaf forked                           Carpinus
                                                                                        ALNUS/BETULACEAE   439

  3. Fruit enclosed by a pouch- or sac-like unlobed bract; bark rough, shreddy, brownish, the trunk
     not appearing rippled; lower surface of mature leaves pubescent; some of the main side veins
     near the base of the leaf forked                                                                  Ostrya
                                                                                                            a


                                              ALNUS ALDER
AA genus of ca. 25 species (Furlow 1997) ranging from the n temperate zone s to Assam, se
Asia, and the Andes of South America. ALDERS have a symbiotic relationship with species of
the actinomycete Frankia (filamentous gram positive bacteria) resulting in root nodule forma-
tion and fixation of atmospheric nitrogen (Furlow 1997); as a result they can be important eco-
logically. Some species also produce useful timber. (Latin name for alder)
REFERENCE: Furlow 1979.

Alnus serrulata (Aiton) Willd., (somewhat serrate or saw-toothed), HAZEL ALDER, COMMON AL-
DER, SMOOTH ALDER. Shrub or small tree 2–5+ m tall; bark grayish brown or blackish gray to red-
dish brown; leaf blades elliptic to obovate, 1.6–12 cm long, usually widest beyond middle, cu-
neate to broadly cuneate basally, usually rounded to acute at apex, usually serrulate and
occasionally somewhat undulate; staminate flowers 3 per bract; pistillate inflorescences cone-
like, ca. 15–20 mm long, the bracts becoming woody and persistent. Along streams and wet ar-
eas; mainly deep e TX, disjunct w to Milam Co. near the e margin of nc TX, also in OK just n of
the Red River. Mar–Apr.

                                              BETULA BIRCH
AA genus of ca. 35 species of n temperate and boreal zones of the n hemisphere (Furlow 1997);
related to Alnus but the catkins shatter when ripe; some provide timber for furniture and ply-
wood; the bark of B. papyrifera Marshall (PAPER BIRCH) is impervious to water and was used by
Native Americans for canoes, baskets, cups, and wigwam covers. (Latin name for birch)

Betula nigra L., (black), RIVER BIRCH, RED BIRCH. Tree to 30 m tall; bark soft, shaggy, pinkish to
tan, freely shedding; leaf blades roughly triangular to ovate, truncate to broadly cuneate at
base, acute at apex, conspicuously doubly serrate at least beyond middle; staminate bracts
ovate to suborbicular; staminate flowers 3 per bract, with calyx; pistillate inflorescences (=
aments) up to 25–35 mm long; pistillate bracts divided from apex into 3 oblong-linear lobes,
papery and eventually deciduous. Along streams and in low woods; Lamar Co. in Red River
drainage, also Henderson and Limestone cos. on e edge of nc TX, also Fannin Co. (Little 1971);
mainly se and e TX. Mar–Apr.

                             CARPINUS HORNBEAM, IRONWOOD
AA genus of ca. 25 species (Furlow 1997) of the n temperate zone, especially e Asia; some pro-
vide good timber for turnery and tools; the very hard wood is used for such things as mallet
heads, tool handles, and levers. According to Peattie (1948), the common name is derived from
horn, for toughness, and beam, an old word for tree, related to the German, baum, tree. (Latin:
carpinus, hornbeam, possibly derived from Latin: carpentum, a Roman horse-drawn vehicle
with wheels made from its hard wood—Furlow 1997)
REFERENCES: Furlow 1987a, 1987b.

Carpinus caroliniana Walter, (of Carolina), AMERICAN HORNBEAM, BLUE-BEECH, WATER-BEECH,
MUSCLETREE, LECHILLO, LEANTREE. Small tree with very hard wood to ca. 10 m tall; bark smooth,
neither shedding nor peeling; leaf blades usually elliptic to ovate, sharply serrate, inconspicu-
ously doubly so; staminate flowers 1 per bract, without calyx; staminate bracts acute, not
awned; pistillate bracts with a long terminal lobe and 2 small lateral lobes near base. Rich or
low woods and along streams; e TX w in Red River drainage to Lamar Co., also Henderson Co.,
440   BIGNONIACEAE

also Hopkins Co. (Little 1971). Mar–May. This species is easily distinguished by its smooth gray
bark and the rippled, muscle-like appearance of the stems. Carpinus caroliniana has an inter-
esting geographic distribution—occurring mainly in the e U.S. but with disjunct populations in
the mountains of Mexico and Guatemala (Miranda & Harrell 1950). This pattern is the result of
a middle to late Miocene (Miocene epoch—24.6–5.1 mya) extension (during a period of climatic
cooling) of deciduous forest and associated fauna (particularly amphibians) into Mexico. Sub-
sequently, during Pliocene (Pliocene epoch—5.1–2 mya) and later times as the climate warmed
and dried, these deciduous forests became disjunct, surviving in Mexico only in isolated pock-
ets of appropriate microclimate in the highlands (Miranda & Sharp 1950; Graham 1993).

                            OSTRYA HOP-HORNBEAM, IRONWOOD
A A genus of ca. 5 species (Furlow 1997) ranging from the n temperate zone to Central
America; some provide timber. The hard wood has been used for such things as sleigh runners,
airplane propellers, and mallet heads (Furlow 1997). (Greek: ostrys, shell, alluding to the in-
flated floral bracts)

Ostrya virginiana (Mill.) K. Koch, (of Virginia), IRONWOOD, EASTERN HOP-HORNBEAM, AMERICAN
HOP-HORNBEAM , WOOLLY AMERICAN HOP-HORNBEAM , LEVERWOOD . Small tree with very hard
wood to ca. 20 m tall; bark roughened, shreddy, brownish; leaf blades usually elliptic to ovate,
sharply doubly serrate; staminate bracts abruptly narrowed to a spine tip (= awned); staminate
flowers 1 per bract, without calyx; pistillate bracts pouch-like. Lowland or upland woods; e TX
with a disjunct collection in the East Cross Timbers at Handley, Tarrant Co., in 1910, but not
found there recently (Mahler 1988). Late Feb–Mar.


      BIGNONIACEAE CATALPA OR TRUMPETVINE FAMILY
Ours shrubs, trees, or woody vines; leaves opposite or the uppermost alternate, simple or pin-
nately compound, entire, toothed, or lobed; flowers rather large and showy, in terminal panicles
or spike-like racemes, or in axillary clusters; calyces short, 2-lipped or unequally 4- to 5-
toothed; corollas campanulate to funnelform, radially symmetrical to bilabiate, 5-lobed; sta-
mens 2 or 4; pistil 2-carpellate; style and stigma 1; fruit a capsule; seeds numerous, winged.

AA medium-sized (750 species in 109 genera), mainly tropical family centered in n South
America; nearly all species are woody, ranging from numerous lianas to trees and shrubs, or
rarely herbs; it includes showy tropical ornamentals such as Crescentia (CALABASH-TREE),
Jacaranda , Kigelia (SAUSAGETREE), Spathodea (AFRICAN-TULIPTREE, FLAMETREE), and Tabebuia
(POUI) as well as some valuable for timber including Tabebuia. Tecoma stans (L.) Juss. ex Kunth,
(genus: from tecomaxochitl, a Mexican name; species: erect, upright), TRUMPET-FLOWER, a yel-
low-flowered small shrub (< 1 m tall), known mainly from the Trans-Pecos, was reported by
Hatch et al. (1990) from vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2); this is apparently based on a collection near
San Antonio (Correll & Johnston 1970) well to the s of nc TX. (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: shrubs, trees, or woody vines with large showy flowers in
racemes, panicles, or axillary clusters; corollas sympetalous, tubular, bilaterally symmetrical,
with 2 or 4 separate, epipetalous stamens; capsules usually large, woody, with winged seeds.
The family shares a number of characters with the Scrophulariaceae (e.g., corolla shape, num-
ber of stamens) and the two are apparently related; however, all nc TX scrophs are herbs.
REFERENCE: Shinners 1961.

1. Corollas bright yellow or greenish yellow to orange-red; leaves all opposite, mostly compound
   (usually 2–13 leaflets); trailing to high-climbing vines; fruits 8–17 cm long.
   2. Tendrils present; leaflets (1–)2, entire, evergreen; flowers in axillary inflorescences          Bignonia
   2. Tendrils absent; leaflets 7–13, sharply toothed, deciduous; flowers in terminal inflorescences   Campsis
                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   441




                                Podophyllum peltatum [LAM, NIC ]




Alnus serrulata [CO1]                                              Betula nigra [SA3]




   Carpinus caroliniana [SA3]                                        Ostrya virginiana [SA3]
442   BIGNONIACEAE/BIGNONIA

1. Corollas white to rosy lavender with orange or purple markings inside; uppermost leaves usually
   alternate; leaves simple; shrubs or trees; fruits to 45 cm long.
   3. Leaves subsessile, the blades linear-lanceolate, glabrous, unlobed                             Chilopsis
   3. Leaves petioled, the blades ovate, pubescent beneath, the larger lobed                          Catalpa


                            BIGNONIA CROSSVINE, QUARTERVINE
AA monotypic genus of the se United States. (Named for the Abbé Jean-Paul Bignon, 1662–
1743, court-librarian at Paris and a friend of Tournefort)

Bignonia capreolata L., (winding or twining), CROSSVINE, QUARTERVINE. High-climbing, woody,
evergreen vine; leaves typically 2-foliate, terminated by a several-branched, disk-bearing ten-
dril; leaflets cordate at base; petioles 1–2 cm long; flowers in axillary clusters; corollas red-or-
ange, lighter inside, 4–5 cm long; capsules linear, flattened, 10–17 cm long. Moist woods in se
and e TX, cultivated and spreads or escapes in nc TX; Dallas and Grayson cos. Mar–Jul.
[Anisostichus capreolata (L.) Bureau]

                                   CAMPSIS TRUMPET-CREEPER
AA genus of 2 species of adventitious root-climbers; both are cultivated as ornamentals; one
occurs in e North America and the other in e Asia.
   This disjunct e Asia-e North America distribution pattern is an interesting one to plant geographers. In
the geologic past, dispersal between the Eurasian and North American continents was possible, and the
combined area is considered a single “Holarctic” biogeographic region. The fossil record shows that many
plants had distributions across the Northern Hemisphere—temperate forests, for example, occurred very
broadly and reached their maximum extension in the mid-Tertiary (the Tertiary extended from 65 million
years ago to 5 mya). This widespread flora has been referred to as the Arcto-Tertiary flora or the Tertiaro-
mesophytic flora. Geohistorical events from the mid-Tertiary to the present have included alterations in
the shapes of the northern land masses, fluctuations in sea levels, mountain building, and profound
changes in the climate. As a result, there have been great changes in both the composition and the disposi-
tion of the flora and the ranges of many plant have been greatly restricted (e.g., eliminated from Europe
and w North America). A significant number now survive in only two areas, e North America and e Asia.
The genus Campsis is such an example (other nc TX examples include Carya , Menispermum, Penthorum,
Phryma, Sassafras, Saururus , Triadenum, Triosteum, and Veronicastrum ) (Li 1952b; Little 1970; Graham
1972; Boufford & Spongberg 1983; Hamilton 1983; Hsü 1983; Wu 1983; Ying 1983; Cox & Moore 1993; Gra-
ham 1993a).
(Greek: campsis, curvature, from the curved stamens)

Campsis radicans (L.) Seem. ex Bureau, (rooting), COMMON TRUMPET-CREEPER, COWITCH VINE,
TRUMPET-HONEYSUCKLE. Shrubby vine climbing to 10 m or more, with aerial rootlets; leaves
odd-pinnate; flowers in terminal panicles; calyx teeth about 1/5 as long as the tube; corollas 2–
2.5 cm long, with 5 short recurved lobes, orange to orange-red with orange-red to scarlet lobes;
capsules cylindric-oblong, 8–12 cm long. Stream banks, disturbed ground, along fences, also
cultivated; e 1/2 of TX. Jun–Aug. This species is sometimes planted as an ornamental but can
get out of control and become problematic. The flowers are visited by and presumably polli-
nated by ruby-throated hummingbirds (Archilochus colubris) (James 1948). Dermatitis has
been reported in some individuals from handling the leaves or flowers (Muenscher 1951;
Burlage 1968). 9 m/81

                         CATALPA INDIAN CIGARTREE, CIGARTREE
AA genus of 11 species of e North America (including the West Indes) and e Asia; this disjunct
distribution pattern is discussed under the genera Campsis (Bignoniaceae) and Carya
                                                                                  BORAGINACEAE     443

(Juglandaceae); cultivated as ornamentals and used for timber. (The Native American name)
REFERENCE: Weniger 1996.

Catalpa speciosa (Warder) Warder ex Engelm., (showy, good-looking), NORTHERN CATALPA,
CATAWBA-TREE , CIGARTREE , HARDY CATALPA. Deciduous tree to 30 m tall; leaf blades ovate to
ovate-oblong, 15–30 cm long, truncate to cordate at base, acuminate at apex; petioles to 15 cm
long; inflorescence a showy, few-flowered panicle; corollas to ca. 50 mm long, white, with yel-
low lines and brown-purple markings inside; fruit a long (20–45(–60) cm), cylindric, cigar-like
capsule ca. 1.5 cm thick; seeds flat, 30–40 mm long, 4–5(–8) mm wide. Cultivated, roadsides,
along streams; escapes in e 1/2 of TX. May. Native of Mississippi Valley. When damaged by her-
bivores, the leaves produce extrafloral nectar which attracts insects that deter the leaf-eating
herbivores (Mabberley 1987).

                         CHILOPSIS DESERT-WILLOW, MIMBRE
AA monotypic genus of the sw United States and Mexico; the branches are used to make bas-
kets. (Greek: chil, lip, and opsi, appearance, from flower shape resembling lips)
REFERENCES: Fosberg 1936; Henrickson 1985.

Chilopsis linearis (Cav.) Sweet, (narrow, with sides nearly paralled), DESERT-WILLOW, FLOWER-
ING-WILLOW, WILLOW-LEAF CATALPA, DESERT-CATALPA, FLOR DE MIMBRE, BOW-WILLOW. Shrub or
small tree to 10 m tall; leaves opposite or alternate; leaf blades linear-lanceolate, entire; inflores-
cences terminal racemes to 30 cm long; flowers sometimes sterile (J. Stanford , pers. comm.); co-
rollas variable in color, usually white with purple lower lip and yellow lines in throat to rarely
both lips white or purplish red with purple stripes; fruits to 30 cm long, usually ca. 6 mm thick.
Cultivated and long persists, planted along highways, escapes; Tarrant Co., also long persisting
(ca. 100 years) in Hamilton Co. (J. Stanford, pers. comm.). May–Sep. Native of Mexico and sw U.S.
e to wc TX.


   BORAGINACEAE FORGET-ME-NOT OR BORAGE FAMILY
Ours pubescent, bristly-hispid, or glabrous annual or perennial herbs; leaves alternate, simple,
entire, usually sessile; flowers terminal or axillary, solitary, in small cymes, or uncurling, 1-
sided, spike-like or raceme-like inflorescences (= scorpioid cymes); sepals 5, barely united at
base; corollas 5-toothed or -lobed, rotate, tubular, funnelform, or salverform; stamens 5, attached
near base of corolla or higher in tube; pistil 2-carpellate; ovary superior, usually 4-lobed; style
and stigma 1; fruit usually breaking into 4 one-seeded achene-like mericarps (“nutlets”), some-
times reduced to fewer by abortion.

AA large (2,300 species in 130 genera) family of mainly temperate and subtropical herbs to
shrubs, trees, and vines including a number of ornamentals such as Heliotropium (HELIO-
TROPE), Mertensia (VIRGINIA BLUEBELLS) and Myosotis(FORGET-ME-NOT); some, including Borago
officinalis L. (BORAGE) and Symphytum officinaleL. (COMFREY), have been used for flavorings or
medicinally; most members of the family are characterized by a 1-sided inflorescence that un-
coils as it matures; alkaloids are often present. The Boraginaceae are related to and sometimes
lumped with the tropical family Ehretiaceae (Judd et al. 1994). There are also affinities with the
Hydrophyllaceae and Verbenaceae. Ehretia anacua (Terán & Berland.) I.M. Johnst., (genus: for
Georg Dionysius Ehret, 1708–1770, illustrator; sp: anacua or anacahuite , Mexican names for the
plants), SUGARBERRY, KNOCKAWAY, ANAGUA, a tree to 15 m tall with orange or dark yellow drupes
ca. 5–8 mm in diam., was cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2). While planted
further n, it is apparently native only as far n as Travis Co. just s of nc TX (Correll & Johnston
1970). This genus of 50 species of tropical and warm areas is treated in the Boraginaceae by
some authorities and in the Ehretiaceae by others. (Asteridae)
444   BORAGINACEAE

FAMILY RECOGNITON IN THE FIELD: herbs with alternate, coarse, rough-hairy leaves and round
stems; flowers usually in scorpioid cymes (= 1-sided, uncurling inflorescences), with sympeta-
lous, radially symmetrical corollas and 5 stamens; fruits of 4 mericarps.
REFERENCES: Johnston 1954a, 1966; Al-Shehbaz 1991.

1. Flowers in naked, spike-like or raceme-like cymes, none or only the lowest in the axils of leaves
   or bracts; corollas very small in all species keying here except the rare Cynoglossum.
   2. Flowers sessile, crowded, remaining less than 5 mm apart in age; ovary unlobed                     Heliotropium
   2. Flowers sessile OR short- to rather long-pedicelled, becoming widely spaced, usually 5–30
      mm or more apart during or after flowering; ovary 4-parted or lobed.
      3. Calyces with ± appressed hairs; corollas usually pale to deep blue (rarely white), 8–12 mm
         broad; basal leaves large, to 26 cm long                                                        Cynoglossum
      3. Calyces with widely spreading or reflexed hairs; corollas white or yellow (rarely slightly
         bluish), very small; leaves small, < 7.5 cm long.
         4. Flowers sessile; calyx hairs all straight and sharp-pointed; axis of spike with both wide-
             spreading (usually conspicuous with a hand lens) and appressed hairs.
             5. Corollas white with greenish yellow eye, < 3 mm long; calyx lobes remaining close
                together and thus appearing fused even at maturity, only slightly spreading apart
                apically; mericarps essentially smooth but with a groove along 1 side                       Cryptantha
             5. Corollas light yellow, 4–5 mm long; calyx lobes often spreading and clearly separated
                at maturity; mericarps with toothed ridges and a conspicuously warty surface, with-
                out a groove                                                                                 Amsinckia
         4. Flowers pedicelled; calyx hairs (at least some) hooked; axis of racemes (except near base)
             with uniformly incurved, subappressed hairs                                                      Myosotis
1. Flowers in the axils of leaves or bracts (these sometimes small); corollas of various sizes, very
   small to large.
   6. Corollas strongly bilaterally symmetrical, funnelform, with the upper side longer, bright blue
      (rarely rose or white), showy, 10–20 mm long; stamens conspicuously exserted from the co-
      rolla, separate; rare introduced species                                                                 Echium
   6. Corollas radially symmetrical, of various colors and sizes; stamens not exserted (except ex-
      serted in Borago where they form a cone around the style as in Solanum); widespread native
      and introduced species.
      7. Corolla limb (= open face of corolla) 10–24 mm wide, pure white with yellow center OR
         blue or purplish; only in West Cross Timbers and e along rivers OR an escaped cultivar.
         8. Corollas pure white with yellow center, with a distinct narrow tube 8–11 mm long; sta-
             mens not exserted; lower leaf blades ca. 18 mm or less wide; stem hairs mostly appressed;
             native in West Cross Timbers and e along rivers                                             Heliotropium
         8. Corollas blue or purplish, rotate to bell-shaped, without a distinct tube; stamens strongly
             exserted, conspicuous; lower leaf blades 30–80 mm wide; stem hairs spreading at ± right
             angle to stem; escaped cultivar                                                                    Borago
      7. Corolla limb < 10 mm wide, OR if more then yellow or orange-yellow; native and introduced
         species widespread in nc TX.
         9. Corollas tubular (lobes not reflexed to form a flattened limb), white to green; leaf blades
             conspicuously 5–7 veined, the veins visible at a glance                                     Onosmodium
         9. Corollas salverform or funnelform (lobes reflexed to form a somewhat flattened limb),
             variously colored; leaf blades with only the central vein conspicuous.
             10. Corollas yellow to orange-yellow, 11–48 mm long (tube plus lobes); plants perennial
                                                                                                        Lithospermum
             10. Corollas variously colored but not yellow (except sometimes in very center), usually
                 < 7.5 mm long, to 13 mm in one species with blue or purple flowers; plants usually
                 annual.
                                                                                AMSINCKIA /BORAGINACEAE         445

           11. Stems with wide-spreading hairs.
               12. Corollas 4–5.5 mm long, white with a yellow center; fruits (= mericarps) not
                   prickly or spiny, easily visible at maturity                                        Lithospermum
               12. Corollas 3 mm or less long, blue to white, sometimes with a yellow center;
                   fruits either prickly or spiny and easily visible at maturity OR not prickly or
                   spiny and completely obscured from view by the calyx lobes.
                   13. Calyces rather coarsely pubescent with slender ± appressed hairs only;
                        calyx lobes not significantly obscuring the fruit from view; fruits prickly or
                        spiny, the prickles sometimes partly or almost completely united into a
                        wing or cup-like structure                                                            Lappula
                   13. Calyces prickly-hispid with spiny, conspicuously spreading hairs and
                        pubescent with slender ones as well; calyx lobes completely obscuring
                        the fruit from view; fruits essentially smooth, not prickly                        Cryptantha
           11. Stems with appressed hairs only.
               14. Upper stem leaves short-petioled or with slender petiolar bases; fruiting calyx
                   lobes conspicuously unequal; flowering late May and after                            Heliotropium
               14. Upper stem leaves sessile, often slightly clasping; fruiting calyx lobes ± equal
                   in length; flowering early May or before                                             Buglossoides


                           AMSINCKIA FIDDLENECK, TARWEED
AA genus of 15 species of w North America and w temperate South America. (Named for
Wilhelm Amsinck, a burgomaster of Hamburg, who early in the 19th century gave important
support to the botanical garden of that city)
REFERENCES: MacBride 1917; Ray & Chisake 1957a, 1957b, 1957c.

Amsinckia menziesii (Lehm.) A. Nelson & J.F. Macbr., (for Archibald Menzies, 1754–1842, British
naval surgeon and botanist who accompanied Vancouver on his voyage of Northwest Pacific
exploration, 1790–1795), SMALL-FLOWER FIDDLENECK. Bristly annual 30–60 cm tall; stems simple
or freely branched, usually decumbent; inflorescences spike-like, becoming greatly elongated,
with few or no bracts; fruiting calyces 6–8 mm long, the lobes narrowly to broadly elongate;
corollas light yellow, narrowly funnelform, 4–5 mm long, the lobes small; mericarps 4, triangu-
lar, 2.5–3 mm long, the surface conspicuously ridged and roughened. Grasslands and dry areas;
included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly c
TX. Mar–May. Native of nw U.S. and adjacent Canada. [A. micrantha Suksd.]

                                                 BORAGO
AA genus of 3 species native to the Mediterannean region, Europe, and Asia; cultivated as or-
namentals. (Possibly from Latin: burra , a hairy garment, alluding to the leaves which are usu-
ally densely hairy)

Borago officinalis L., (medicinal), BORAGE. Coarsely hairy annual; stems ascending to erect, 20–
70 cm tall; leaves alternate, entire, obovate to oblong; inflorescences open, leafy, cymose; calyces
of 5 linear segments; corollas blue or purplish, large, the lobes 8–12 mm long and somewhat re-
flexed; anthers 5, connivent in an erect cone-like arrangement, 5–8 mm long; ovary 4-lobed;
mericarps 4. Cultivated and escapes, weedy area; Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon pers. obs.); we are
not aware of other TX localities. Spring–fall. Native to Mediterranean region. This species has
been used as a flavoring, medicinally, and as an ornamental (Woodland 1997). Borago flowers
are an example of the “vibrator” or “buzz” pollination syndrome; pollinators (such as bumble-
bees) shake the anthers by vibrating their thoracic flight muscles at a certain frequency; this
sets up a resonance in the anthers or the space they enclose and the otherwise inaccessible pol-
len is released from the anthers and collected by the insect (Barth 1985; Proctor et al. 1996). The
446   BORAGINACEAE/BUGLOSSOIDES

turned back (reflexed) corollas and exposed anther-cone of “vibrator”-type flowers may be an
adaptation to minimize dampening of vibration resonance or it may be an adaptation related
to microclimate in the flower (e.g., to keep the pollen in a dry powdery condition so that it is
easily dispersed) (Corbet et al. 1988; Proctor et al. 1996). I

                                      BUGLOSSOIDES
AA temperate Eurasian genus of 15 species; it is sometimes lumped into Lithospermum (e.g.,
Mabberley 1997). (From the old genus name, Buglossum, and the Greek, -oides, resembling)

Buglossoides arvensis (L.) I.M. Johnst., (pertaining to cultivated fields). Erect annual, 20–70 cm
tall; stem leaves lanceolate to linear; flowers in leafy bracted racemes which at maturity are
loosely flowered; corollas white (rarely yellowish or purplish); mericarps brown, tuberculate,
wrinkled, or pitted, ca. 3 mm long. Ditch banks, roadsides, disturbed sites; se and e TX w to
West Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–May. Native of Europe. Sometimes recognized
in the genus Lithospermum [as L. arvense L.] (e.g., Jones et al. 1997). I

                                        CRYPTANTHA
AA genus of 100 species of w North America. (Greek: krypto, to hide, and anthos, flower, from
cleistogamous flowers of some species)
REFERENCE: Johnston 1925.

Cryptantha texana (A. DC.) Greene, (of Texas), TEXAS CRYPTANTHA. Prickly-hispid annual with
erect to decumbent stems to 40 cm long; flowers in uncurling, 1-sided inflorescences to ca. 15
cm long, without bracts; calyces with conspicuous sharp hairs; corollas white with greenish
yellow eye, < 3 mm long; mericarp usually 1. Loose sandy soils; s Texas n to Somervell Co.; en-
demic to TX. Apr–May. E

               CYNOGLOSSUM HOUND’S-TONGUE, BEGGAR’S-LICE
AA temperate and warm area, especially Old World genus of ca. 75 species; some have alka-
loids; a few are cultivated as ornamentals and the European C. officinaleL. (HOUND’S TONGUE)
was formerly used medicinally. (Greek: kyon or cyno, dog, and glossa, tongue, alluding to the
strap-shaped, lumpy leaves)

Cynoglossum virginianum L., (of Virginia), BLUE COMFREY, BLUE HOUND’S-TONGUE, WILD COM-
FREY. Erect pubescent perennial, 30–80 cm tall; basal leaves large, to ca. 26 cm long, elliptic-ob-
long, with long petioles to ca. 7 cm long; stem leaves smaller, sessile and some ± clasping; inflo-
rescences branched, long pedunculate; corollas blue to whitish, ca. 8–12 mm broad; mericarps
5.5–7 mm long, covered with bristles and sticking to hair or clothing. Sandy woods, low ground;
Dallas Co.; mainly e TX. Mar–Apr. According to Burlage (1968), reputed to be poisonous. 9

Cynoglossum zeylanicum(Hornem.) Thunb. ex Lehm., (of Ceylon, Ceylonese), native to Asia, is
reported by Hatch et al. (1990) from vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) and e TX; we have seen no TX
specimens of this species. It differs from C. virginianum in having smaller mericarps (2.5–4
mm long) and smaller corollas (< 6 mm broad). I

                                ECHIUM VIPER’S-BUGLOSS
AAn Old World genus of 60 species; a number are cultivated as ornamentals, some were used
medicinally, and 9 some contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids (Kingsbury 1964). (A plant name
used by Dioscorides, from Greek: echis, viper; from a supposed resemblance of the mericarps to
a viper’s head)
                                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        447




Bignonia capreolata [RAD]


                                                     Campsis radicans [REE]                     Chilopsis linearis [SA3]




                        Catalpa speciosa [SA3]                                                Amsinckia menziesii [ PNW]




                            Borago officinalis [BEN, EN2]                                       Buglossoides arvensis [REE]
448   BORAGINACEAE/HELIOTROPIUM

Echium vulgare L., (common), BLUEWEED, BLUEDEVIL, VIPER’S-BUGLOSS. Rough, bristly, biennial
herb; stems erect, 30–90 cm tall; leaves alternate; lower leaves oblanceolate, broadly stalked,
forming a non-persistent rosette; stem leaves reduced upward, the middle ones linear-lan-
ceolate, 3–9 cm long, sessile; inflorescences panicle-like, the side branches one-sided, bracteate;
corollas bright blue (rarely rose or white), showy, 10–20 mm long; stamens 5, 4 conspicuously
exserted, the fifth included or barely exserted; mericarps 1–4, ca. 2 mm long, much shorter than
the persistent calyces. Roadsides, waste places; Burnet Co. on sw margin of nc TX (portion of a
single plant was collected by Chuck Sexton in 1997, pers. comm.); other TX locations not
known. Native of Eurasia. This species can be an obnoxious weed in some parts of e North
America (Fernald 1950a). Reported to contain poisonous pyrrolizidine alkaloids, consolicine
and cynoglossine; toxicity is associated with the use of Echium in herbal teas; severe liver dam-
age can result; the bristly hairs can also produce dermatitis (Muenscher 1951; Burlage 1968;
Lampe & McCann 1985). 9 I

                          HELIOTROPIUM HELIOTROPE, TURNSOLE
Ours annual to perennial, glabrous or pubescent herbs; flowers in terminal, bractless, 1-sided,
uncoiling cymes or in bracted cymes or solitary in the upper axils and at the tips of branches;
corollas funnelform to salverform, white to blue or purplish; mericarps 4, free or in pairs, some-
times seemingly 2.

AA tropical and temperate genus of ca. 250 species; a number are cultivated as ornamentals;
9 some contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids and can cause severe liver damage; because toxicity is
associated with their use as herbal teas (Lampe & McCann 1985), they should not be used in
teas or ingested in other ways. (Ancient name from Greek: helios, the sun, and trope, a turn; an-
cient writers believed the flowers turned toward the sun; or because some species flower at
summer soltice)

1. Flowers numerous, in 1-sided, bractless, conspicuously uncurling spike-like cymes.
   2. Plant glabrous and glaucous; leaves succulent                                                     H. curassavicum
   2. Plant pubescent, not glaucous; leaves not succulent.
      3. Leaves with a very distinct petiole 4–10 cm long; leaf blades ovate to elliptic, 20–100 mm
         wide                                                                                                 H. indicum
      3. Leaves without a distinct petiole, sessile or nearly so; leaf blades oblong to oblanceolate, 18
         mm or less wide                                                                                 H. amplexicaule
1. Flowers solitary in leaf axils and at branch tips or relatively few in a leafy-bracted cyme that does
   not uncurl.
   4. Corolla limb (= open face of flower) 4–8 mm broad; leaf blades linear or linear-lanceolate, 1–
      3(–5) mm or less wide                                                                                  H. tenellum
   4. Corolla limb 10–22 mm broad; leaf blades lanceolate to elliptic or ovate, to 18 mm wide
                                                                                                     H. convolvulaceum

Heliotropium amplexicaule Vahl, (stem-clasping), VIOLET HELIOTROPE. Pubescent perennial 20–
50 cm tall; inflorescence terminal on an essentially bractless peduncle 1–10 cm long, of 2–5 un-
coiling, 1-sided, spike-like cymes; corollas funnelform, blue or purple (rarely white), the limb 4–
8 mm across, the tube ca. 5 mm long. Cultivated and escaped to fields and waste places; Bell Co.
and Milam–Bell Co. line; mainly e TX and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Aug. Native of Argentina and
Uruguay. I

Heliotropium convolvulaceum (Nutt.) A. Gray, (resembling Convolvulus—bindweed), BINDWEED
HELIOTROPE, Annual to ca. 40 cm tall; flowers axillary, not in well-defined inflorescences; corol-
las conspicuous, white with yellow throat, fragrant, with broad limb that is obscurely if at all
lobed and narrow tube 8–11 mm long. Loose sandy soils; Panhandle to Trans-Pecos, e to Palo
                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       449




                                                                Cynoglossum virginianum [EN1]




                       Cryptantha texana [HEA]




Echium vulgare [MUE]                                     Heliotropium amplexicaule [CUR]
450   BORAGINACEAE/LAPPULA

Pinto and Wichita cos. and e along Red River to Grayson and Lamar cos., also e along Brazos
River to McLennan Co. (Correll & Johnston 1970). Late Jun–Sep. The hairs of this plant can be
quite irritating.

Heliotropium curassavicum L., (of Curaçao in s West Indies), SALT HELIOTROPE, CHINESE-PULSEY,
QUAILPLANT, SEASIDE HELIOTROPE, COLA DE MICO. Usually rhizomatous perennial with prostrate
to half decumbent rubbery stems; corollas usually white or bluish, with yellow eye, small, the
limb 4–7 mm across. Low alkaline places, saline situations; Archer, Brown, Dallas, Grayson, and
Young counties, also Tarrant Co. (Mahler 1988); mainly Rolling Plains s and w to w TX, also
coastal. Jun–Aug. The Spanish common name, COLA DE MICO, meaning monkey’s tail, is pre-
sumably in reference to the uncoiling inflorescences. The species is considered native from the s
U.S. s through the West Indes and Central America s to South America (Correll & Johnston
1970). Toxicity has been reported from the use of this plant in herbal teas (Mulligan & Munro
1990). 9

Heliotropium indicum L., (of India), INDIA HELIOTROPE, TURNSOLE, ALACRANCILLO. Densely pu-
bescent annual to 1 m tall; corollas blue or violet, rarely white, the limb to 4.5 mm across, the
throat glabrous outside; fruits 2-lobed; mericarps smooth, strongly ribbed. Moist disturbed ar-
eas of creeks and ponds; se and e TX w to Grayson and Tarrant cos.; also w to Bexar Co. Jun–Oct.
Despite the specific epithet, this species is considered to be native to the warmer parts of the
New World; it is also present [introduced?] in the Old World tropics (Correll & Johnston 1970);
Hatch et al. (1990) treated it as native to TX. Poisonous due to the presence of pyrrolizidine alka-
loids (Burlage 1968; Lampe & McCann 1985). 9

Heliotropium tenellum (Nutt.) Torr., (tender, soft), PASTURE HELIOTROPE. Erect annual to ca. 50 cm
tall, appressed-pubescent; flowers solitary at branch tips and in upper axils, together some-
times appearing like a loose, bracted raceme; corollas white with a yellowish eye, the limb 5–6
mm across; mericarps 4, ribbed, at first paired and the fruit conspicuously 2-lobed. Limestone
outcrops; most of e 1/2 of TX. May–Oct.

Two additional species, H. procumbensMill., (prostrate), and H. racemosum Rose & Standl.,
(with flowers in racemes), cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), probably
occur only to the s of nc TX. Heliotropium procumbensresembles H. indicum but has white co-
rollas with the throat sparingly pubescent outside, while H. racemosum resembles H.
convolvulaceumbut has the corollas clearly lobed, the lobes triangular and acute, and the flow-
ers in well-defined racemose inflorescences.

                                         LAPPULA STICKSEED
AA genus of 40 temperate Eurasian species and 5 in North America. (Latin: lappa, a bur, pre-
sumably in reference to the fruit)
REFERENCE: Johnston 1924.

Lappula occidentalis (S. Watson) Greene, (western). Annuals 10–50 cm tall, hispid-villous; co-
rollas pale blue to white, sometimes with yellow eye, small, the tube about 1.2 mm long;
mericarps 4, smooth with margins of a single row of prickles, the prickles separate or united
into wings. Sandy or gravelly open ground. Late Mar–May.

1. Prickles of fruits partly or almost completely joined into spiny-margined wings or a cup-like
   structure                                                                                         var. cupulata
1. Prickles of fruits separate or nearly so                                                     var. occidentalis

var. cupulata (A. Gray) L.C. Higgins, (cup-like), HAIRY STICKSEED, CUPSEED. Mills, Palo Pinto, and
Wichita cos. w and s to w TX, local e to Fort Worth (Tarrant Co.) where probably introduced. [L.
                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS              451




Heliotropium convolvulaceum [IPL]                                          Heliotropium curassavicum [MAS ]




Heliotropium indicum [EN2]                  Heliotropium tenellum [GLE ]               Lappula occidentalis var. cupulata [BB2]




          Lithospermum caroliniense [GLE]                                      Lithospermum incisum [HO 1]
452   BORAGINACEAE/LITHOSPERMUM

redowskii of authors, not (Hornem.) Greene var. texana (Scheele) Brand, L. redowskii of authors,
not (Hornem.) Greene var. cupulata (A. Gray) M.E. Jones, L. texana (Scheele) Britton]

var. occidentalis (S. Watson) Rydb., FLAT-SPINE STICKSEED. Mainly Palo Pinto and Wichita cos. s
and w to w TX. [L. redowskii of authors, not (Hornem.) Greene, L. redowskii of authors, not var.
occidentalis (S. Watson) Rydb.]

                          LITHOSPERMUM PUCCOON, GROMWELL
Ours low, pubescent perennials or annuals with rather showy yellow to orange-yellow flowers
(or flowers small and white with yellow centers in one species rare on s margin of nc TX) in
leafy-bracted terminal inflorescences; mericarps smooth or pitted, sometimes with a constric-
tion above the base.

AA genus of 45 species in temperate regions of the world except Australia; some are culti-
vated as ornamentals or used medicinally; the roots of some U.S. species were used by Native
Americans and early settlers as a source of a red dye; it is still used today in dying weaver’s wool
(Ajilvsgi 1984). (Greek: lithos, stone, and sperma, seed, from the hard mericarps)
REFERENCES: Johnston 1952; Govoni 1973.

1. Corollas white with yellow centers; corolla tubes < 2 mm long; plants annual; on s margin of nc
   TX                                                                                             L. matamorense
1. Corollas yellow to orange-yellow; corolla tubes 7–37 mm long; plants perennial; widespread in
   nc TX.
   2. Corolla lobes toothed or ruffled; corolla tubes 13–35 mm long; stems appressed-pubescent;
      leaves usually acute                                                                               L. incisum
   2. Corolla lobes entire; corolla tubes 7–14 mm long; stems spreading-pubescent; leaves usually
      obtuse                                                                                        L. caroliniense

Lithospermum caroliniense (Walter ex J.F. Gmel.) MacMill., (of Carolina), PUCCOON, CAROLINA
GROMWELL, CAROLINA PUCCOON. Erect perennial 30–100 cm tall; corollas orange-yellow, the limb
to ca. 22 mm across; basal leaves often dried up or absent by flowering time; upper stem leaves
3–7 times as long as wide, to ca. 10 mm wide; mericarps 3–3.5 mm long, smooth or pitted, lustrous,
white. Sandy woods; mainly se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also in Panhandle. Apr–May.

Lithospermum incisum Lehm., (incised, cut), NARROW-LEAF GROMWELL, NARROW-LEAF PUC-
COON. Erect perennial to ca. 40 cm tall; basal leaves sometimes dried up or absent by flowering
time; stem leaves usually 3–6 mm wide; upper stem leaves 8–20 times as long as wide; spring
inflorescences with usually sterile flowers, the corollas showy, lemon- or deep-yellow, the limbs
9–20 mm across; late spring and summer inflorescences with minute, very fertile, cleistoga-
mous flowers with permanently closed corollas 1–2.5 mm long; mericarps 2.5–3 mm long,
smooth or pitted, lustrous, whitish. Prairies, open woods, and roadsides; throughout TX. Late
Mar–Apr. After the production of conspicuous flowers in the spring, plants of this species typi-
cally produce large numbers of small cleistogamous flowers that are extremely fertile
(Johnston 1952). The roots were the source of a red dye for Native Americans and settlers
(Tveten & Tveten 1993). m/96

Lithospermum matamorense DC., (of Matamoros, Mexico), ROUGH GROMWELL. Decumbent to
erect annual; stems to 40 cm long; leaves obtuse or retuse apically, gradually reduced up the
stem; basal leaves largest, to 9 cm long and 20 mm wide, often present at flowering time; corolla
limb 4–7 mm across; mericarps 2.5–3 mm long, whitish or brownish, pitted. Thickets, open
woods, floodplains, and weedy areas; Burnet Co. (Balcones Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife Refuge,
C. Sexton, pers. comm.) on s margin of nc TX; also San Saba Co. just s of nc TX, Sexton also indi-
cates a Travis Co. location just s of nc TX; mainly Edwards Plateau to s TX.
                                                                                   MYOSOTIS/BORAGINACEAE          453

                      MYOSOTIS SCORPION-GRASS, FORGET-ME-NOT
Ours small hairy annuals; inflorescences racemose, becoming loosely flowered; calyces hairy;
corollas inconspicuous, usually white (or slightly bluish), 2–3.5 mm long; mericarps 4, ovoid to
ellipsoid, smooth and shiny.

AA genus of ca. 100 species of temperate areas and tropical mountains; a number are culti-
vated as ornamentals and some have corollas changing from pink to blue in color. (Greek: myos,
of a mouse, and oto, ear, from shape of the leaves or the soft leaves in some species)

1. Pedicels obliquely spreading from base, straight or slightly curved; racemes elongating rapidly,
   the calyces soon becoming 5–30 mm apart; stem hairs mostly 1–1.5 mm long; fruiting calyces
   sometimes > 5 mm long; most mature calyx hairs hooked                                             M. macrosperma
1. Pedicels closely ascending or erect in their basal part, rather abruptly outcurved near tip; racemes
   elongating gradually, the calyces (except lowest) becoming 1–8 mm apart; stem hairs 0.5–1.1
   mm long; fruiting calyces < 5 mm long; only a few of the mature calyx hairs hooked                       M. verna

Myosotis macrosperma Engelm., (large-seeded), SPRING FORGET-ME-NOT. Plant erect, 20–50 cm
tall. Sandy or silty woods, stream banks, fencerows, and roadsides; se and e TX w to West Cross
Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–early May.

Myosotis verna Nutt., (of Spring), EARLY SCORPION-GRASS, SOUTHERN FORGET-ME-NOT. Sandy
open woods, roadsides, and old fields; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also Edwards Pla-
teau. Apr–early May.

                     ONOSMODIUM MARBLESEED, FALSE GROMWELL
Ours conspicuously hairy, leafy perennials from a taproot; leaves alternate, entire, usually con-
spicuously 5–7 veined; flowers usually numerous in uncurling, 1-sided, terminal or branched
racemes or occasionally axillary; corollas tubular, slightly enlarged just below junction of tube
and 5 erect lobes, greenish white to whitish or yellowish white, 9–20 mm long; fruit usually of
(by abortion) 1(–2–4) mericarp(s) 5 mm or less long, conspicuously white to whitish brown.

AA genus of 7 species native to Mexico, the United States, and closely adjacent Canada (Turner
1995a). We are following the recent treatment by Turner (1995a) for nomenclature of
Onosmodium. The conspicuous mericarps give rise to the common name MARBLESEED. (Named
from a likeness to the genus Onosma—an Old World genus of Boraginaceae, from Greek: osnos,
ass, and osme, smell, alluding to the roots)
REFERENCES: MacKenzie 1906; Johnston 1954a, 1954b; Turner 1995a.

1. Pedicels of flowers (both at flowering time and later) short, 0.5–5(–7) mm long; leaves with short
   strigose (= appressed) hairs on lower and upper surfaces under longer pubescence, at least near
   veins; larger corollas mostly 9–13 mm long; bracts lanceolate, usually not greatly enlarged;
   widespread in nc TX                                                                                  O. bejariense
1. Pedicels of flowers (both at flowering time and later) elongate, usually 5–15 mm long, the lower
   ones often 10–15 mm long; leaves completely lacking short strigose hairs, having only erect or
   ascending bristles ca. 1 mm long on the leaves; larger corollas mostly (11–)17–20 mm long; bracts
   ovate or elliptic, much enlarged; mainly sc TX n to Williamson Co. on extreme s margin of nc TX
                                                                                                            O. hellerii

Onosmodium bejariense DC. ex A. DC., (presumably for Bexar County on se edge of the Edwards
Plateau, location of San Antonio). Erect or ascending often suffruticose herb usually 0.4–1.1 m
tall; mid-stem leaves lanceloate, oblanceolate to elliptic, 6–12 cm long, 2–4 cm wide, sessile or
nearly so; calyces 4–9 mm long; larger corollas whitish or greenish white; mature styles extend-
454   BRASSICACEAE

ing from the corollas for 5–25 mm; mericarps mostly 3–5 mm long. According to Turner
(1995a), who excluded O. molle from this species (see note below), the earliest name is O.
bejariense .

1. Mid-stem hairs widely spreading, the vestiture mostly 2–4 mm high; mericarps mostly 3–4 mm
   long; widespread in nc TX                                                                    var. bejariense
1. Mid-stem hairs appressed or ascending, the vestiture mostly 1–2 mm high; mericarps mostly 4
   5 mm long; in TX known only from Tarrant and Wichita cos.                                   var. occidentale

var. bejariense, BEJAR MARBLESEED. Grasslands or openings in forests, silty or silty-clay soils,
limestone outcrops; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau; by far the most
common nc TX MARBLESEED . Turner’s treatment (1995a) differs significantly from previous
ones (e.g., Correll & Johnston 1970) in that nearly all nc TX MARBLESEEDS are treated as O.
bejariense var. bejariense . Apr–Jul. [O. molleMichx. var. bejariense (DC. ex A. DC.) Cronquist, O.
molle subsp. bejariense (DC. ex A. DC.) Cochrane]

var. occidentale (Mack.) B.L. Turner, (western), WESTERN MARBLESEED. Shady areas; deep clay or
rocky banks; according to Turner (1995a), this variety is known in TX only in Tarrant and
Wichita cos. May–Jul. [O. occidentale Mack.]

var. hispidissimum (Mack.) B.L. Turner, (most hispid or bristly), ROUGH MARBLESEED. According
to Turner (1995a), this variety, which can be distinguished from the 2 varieties occurring in nc
TX by its shorter corollas (mostly 6–10 mm long versus mostly (11–)17–20 mm) and mericarps
mostly flared at base (versus mericarps mostly tapered to the base), is known only to the e of
TX (ne U.S. sw to Louisiana); Correll and Johnston (1970) reported an 1880 collection from
Dallas–however, given that this is several hundred miles w of the range of this variety, an error
is suspected. [O. hispidissimumMack.]

Onosmodium helleri Small, (for its discoverer, Amos Arthur Heller, 1867–1944, Pennsylvania
botanist and collector of w plants), HELLER’S MARBLESEED. Erect herb 30–60 cm tall; stems pu-
bescent with both reflexed and spreading coarse hairs, the vestiture 1–2 mm high; mid-stem
leaves narrowly to broadly elliptic, mostly 8–16 cm long, (2–)3–8 cm wide, sparsely pilose on
upper and lower surfaces, the hairs rough to the touch; calyces 6–10 mm long; larger corollas
creamy white; styles extending beyond the corollas for 6–12 mm; mericarps 3–3.6 mm long. Ju-
niper oak woodlands, on crumbly, rather bare limestone soils, typically on slopes; Williamson
Co. (Turner 1995a), also Burnet Co. (Balcones Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife Refuge, C. Sexton, pers.
comm.); narrowly endemic to ca. 8 counties of the Edwards Plateau and s Lampasas Cut Plain.
Mar–May. (TOES 1993: V) m E

Onosmodiummolle Michx., (soft). According to Turner (1995a), this species is limited to the ce-
dar glades of c Tennessee and closely adjacent Kentucky and Alabama. Texas MARBLESEEDS pre-
viously treated as O. molle by a number of authors are now considered part of O. bejariense.


       BRASSICACEAE (CRUCIFERAE) MUSTARD FAMILY
Ours annual or perennial herbs; leaves basal or alternate, simple or pinnately compound, entire,
toothed, or lobed; flowers in terminal or axillary racemes; sepals 4; petals 4 (or more numerous
in cultivated plants), in a cross-like arrangement, commonly with an elongate claw and an
abruptly spreading blade, equal or unequal (2 larger, 2 smaller), or petals absent; stamens 2–6
(when 6, 4 long and 2 short); pistil 1; ovary superior; fruit a silique (= dry, dehiscent, variously
shaped, many-seeded, 2-valved capsule with valves splitting from the bottom and leaving a
false partition known as a replum).
                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   455




        Lithospermum matamorense [HEA]




                                                                                  Myosotis macrosperma [GLE]




                               Onosmodium bejariense var. bejariense [HEA]




Myosotis verna [GLE]




                                                                                  Onosmodium helleri [HEA]
456   BRASSICACEAE

A A large (3,250 species in 365 genera), economically important, cosmopolitan, but
predominently n temperate family of mostly herbs or rarely shrubs; 9 sulfur-containing mus-
tard oil glucosides are often present and frequently cyanogenic compounds as well; these can
result in digestive problems or even death in livestock (Kingsbury 1964; Blackwell 1990). Many
Brassica species are cultivated and yield a variety of foods (e.g., cabbage, turnip, mustard) and
oils (e.g., rapeseed or canola oil); other genera (e.g., Lobularia –SWEET-ALYSSUM, Lunaria –HON-
ESTY or MONEYPLANT) are cultivated as ornamentals, for landscapes, and for dried arrange-
ments; some are aggressive weeds. Petal measurements in the treatments include both blade
and claw (if present). Brassicaceae are closely related to Capparaceae and appear to represent an
herbaceous clade within that family. From a cladistic standpoint they should be lumped with
Capparaceae to form a more inclusive monophyletic family, which based on nomenclatural
rules, should be called Brassicaceae (Judd et al. 1994). (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs with alternate or basal leaves and flowers with 4 petals
in a cruciform or cross arrangement (flower color variable, but typically yellow or white), sta-
mens usually 4 long and 2 shortor 2 or 4, and characteristic fruits (siliques) borne in racemes.
Similar to Capparaceae but that family often has somewhat bilaterally symmetrical flowers
(not cross-like), inflorescence bracts (these absent in Brassicaceae), stamens never 4+2, and
fruits lacking a transverse partition (this present in Brassicaceae).
REFERENCES: Rollins 1981, 1993; Al-Shehbaz 1984, 1985a, 1985b, 1986b, 1987, 1988a, 1988b, 1988c;
Judd et al. 1994.

1. Plants with auricled-clasping upper stem leaves.
   2. Stems glabrous.
      3. Petals 7–15 mm long including claw; fruits 3–11 cm long, much longer than broad.
         4. Petals deep yellow, with claw shorter to slightly longer than the blade; mature fruits 3–10
            cm long; lower leaves often pinnately lobed or divided                                           Brassica
                                                                                                                    a
         4. Petals yellowish white, with claw 3–4 times as long as the blade; mature fruits 8–11 cm
            long; leaves neither lobed nor divided                                                         Conringia
      3. Petals 1–5 mm long including claw OR petals absent; fruits < 2 cm long, often nearly as
         broad as long.
         5. Petals white; fruits flat, orbicular, 8–15 mm wide, deeply notched at apex                       Thlaspi
         5. Petals greenish yellow or yellow, withering whitish OR petals absent (then sepals yellow);
            fruits not as above.
            6. Petals 3–4 mm long including claw; upper leaves widest at base; fruits roughly inverted
               triangular (widest distally, also with a small beak)                                        Myagrum
            6. Petals 0–2.5 mm long including claw; upper leaves narrow at base; fruits narrowly
               cylindric                                                                                     Rorippa
   2. Stems pubescent or pilose, at least in lower part.
      7. Petals 0–2.5 mm long including claw; fruits inverted triangular-heart-shaped                       Capsella
      7. Petals 4–10 mm long including claw; fruits ± round.
         8. Pedicels loosely pubescent; petals rich yellow or orange-yellow; leaves pinnatifid to
            entire                                                                                        Lesquerella
         8. Pedicels glabrous; petals light yellow or yellowish white; leaves entire or merely serrate      Camelina
1. Plants without auricled-clasping upper leaves.
   9. Petals light or greenish yellow to deep yellow or red-orange OR petals absent and sepals
      yellow.
      10. Petals 0–3 mm long including claw, not or slightly exceeding the sepals.
          11. Leaves simple (but can be lobed or pinnatifid), or only the lower compound and with
               lobed leaflets.
               12. Larger leaf blades with main lobes obtuse; young fruits 2–3 times as long as thick,
                   ovoid, oblong, or cylindric                                                               Rorippa
                                                                                                   BRASSICACEAE     457

           12. Larger leaf blades with lobes acute; young fruits 5–10 times as long as thick, nar-
                rowly linear                                                                                 Sisymbrium
       11. Leaves all pinnately compound, the leaflets usually deeply once or twice pinnatifid
           and thus appearing highly dissected                                                               Descurainia
   10. Petals 3–15 mm long including claw, 1.5–2.5 times as long as the sepals.
       13. Pedicels usually gray or silvery, with minute, appressed or subappressed, simple, stel-
           late, or half-scaly pubescence (use lens).
           14. Petals with wide claw shorter than or equaling the blade; mature fruits globose or
                nearly so, < 10 mm long                                                                      Lesquerella
           14. Petals with slender claw longer than the blade; mature fruits much longer than
                wide, 40–120 mm long                                                                          Erysimum
       13. Pedicels glabrous or with few loose hairs.
           15. Pedicels elongating rapidly and becoming 2–many times as long as the calyces
                before the petals wither; plants ill-smelling; leaves crowded at base of plant; petals
                5–8 mm long including claw; mature fruits 20–35 mm long, 1–2 mm in diam.                      Diplotaxis
           15. Pedicels elongating gradually, slightly shorter to slightly longer than the calyces
                before the petals wither; plants not with the above combination.
                16. Stem leaves (except lowest) unlobed or deeply lobed only in basal half; large
                    terminal portion of blade as wide as rest of leaf or wider, with convex (= out-
                    curved) sides; sepals 3–11 mm long; petals bright yellow.
                    17. Buds when ready to open 4–10 mm long; mature fruits 10–100 mm long,
                         linear or narrowly cylindric.
                         18. Beak of fruits terete or narrowly conical, not containing a seed; valves
                              of fruits with 1 most prominent nerve, the other nerves much weaker;
                              leaves not clasping OR clasping; stems usually glabrous (or hirsute in
                              B. nigra); fruits variable in length, 10–100 mm long                             Brassica
                                                                                                                      a
                         18. Beak of fruits large, flat or conspicuously angled, usually containing 1
                              seed; valves of fruits with 3 parallel nearly equal veins; leaves not clasp-
                              ing; stems hispid-pubescent at least in lower part; fruits 35 mm or less
                              long                                                                              Sinapis
                    17. Buds when ready to open 2–4 mm long; mature fruits (including beak) 3–
                         9 mm long, of 2 distinct segments, the upper segment larger and nearly
                         globose, the lower cylindrical                                                       Rapistrum
                16. Stem leaves deeply lobed; terminal portion of blade narrower than the rest of
                    the leaf OR widely triangular with deeply indented sides; sepals 2–5 mm long;
                    petals sulfur or light yellow.
                    19. Larger leaf blades with obtuse lobes; lower flowers usually with pinnatifid
                         bracts; fruits 2–4 cm long; pedicels and fruits spreading-ascending; upper
                         stem and axis of raceme usually pubescent                                           Erucastrum
                    19. Larger leaf blades with acute lobes; lower flowers usually without bracts;
                         fruits 1–10 cm long; pedicels and fruits closely appressed to spreading-
                         ascending; upper stem and axis of raceme glabrous                                   Sisymbrium
9. Petals yellowish white, white, pink, blue-purple, or purple OR petals absent and sepals green
   or partly reddish or purple-brown.
   20. Fruits indehiscent, separating transversely into 1- or 2-seeded segments.
       21. Petals blue-purple, 7–11 mm long including claw; mature fruits 1–2 mm wide; stigmas
           slender, minute                                                                                   Chorispora
                                                                                                                      a
       21. Petals white to pale purple, 15–20 mm long including claw; mature fruits 6–10 mm
           wide; stigmas broad, emarginate                                                                    Raphanus
   20. Fruits dehiscent longitudinally by valves or manner of dehiscence unclear.
458   BRASSICACEAE

       22. Fruits ending in 2 distinct very conspicuous horns (horns ca. 3–6 mm long), densely
           pubescent, grayish, 70–100 mm long; petals 15–20 mm long including claw, lilac or
           purple                                                                                           Matthiola
       22. Fruits not ending in 2 distinct horns, usually glabrous (rarely pubescent), 2–90 mm
           long; petals 1.5–20 mm long including claw, variously colored.
           23. Plants glabrous; sepals deep purple, not spreading, together urn-shaped; petals
               12–20 mm long including claw; fruits 6–10 cm long, to 2 mm wide                          Streptanthus
           23. Plants without the above combination; petals 7 mm or less long including claw
               (except in Raphanus which has much wider fruits than Strepthanthus and in
               Iodanthus which has fruits only 2–4 cm long).
               24. Petals 15–20 mm long including claw, white to pale purple; mature fruits 40-
                   50 mm long, 6–10 mm wide, round in cross-section                                        Raphanus
               24. Petals 14 mm or less long including claw (usually 7 mm or less), variously
                   colored; mature fruits 2–90 mm long, up to 3 mm wide, round or flat in cross-
                   section.
                   25. Petals 7–14 mm long including claw, white to lavender; fruits 2–4 cm long
                                                                                                           Iodanthus
                   25. Petals 7 mm or less long including claw, variously colored; fruits variable in
                       length, 2–90 mm long.
                     26. Ovaries and young fruits more than twice as long as wide; fruits variable
                          in length, 2–90 mm long.
                          27. Stems pubescent in upper part                                                    Draba
                          27. Stems glabrous in upper part.
                               28. Petals 1.5–3 mm long including claw; stem leaves compound or
                                   deeply lobed; fruits 2–30 mm long.
                                   29. Leaves compound, the leaflets distinctly narrowed at very
                                        base; fruits < 1 mm wide; lower leaves with 1–5(–6) leaflets
                                        on each side                                                      Cardamine
                                   29. Leaves lobed almost to midrib, appearing nearly compound
                                        but the rachis wing-margined, the lobes not narrowed at very
                                        base; fruits ca. 1.2–2 mm wide; lower leaves with 5–14 divi-
                                        sions on each side                                                     Sibaraa
                               28. Petals 3–7 mm long including claw; stem leaves simple (can be
                                   fairly deeply lobed) OR compound (if compound the plant
                                   aquatic or semi-aquatic); fruits 10–90 mm long.
                                   30. Stem leaves few or none, the leaves mostly basal; fruits 20-
                                        35 mm long; flowers lavender                                       Diplotaxis
                                   30. Stem leaves conspicuously present; fruits 4–9 cm long OR if
                                        shorter the plant aquatic or semiaquatic; flowers white or lav-
                                        ender-pink.
                                        31. Leaves simple; fruits 40–90 mm long; plants erect                  Arabis
                                        31. Leaves compound; fruits 10–20 mm long; plants floating,
                                            creeping, or ascending                                           Rorippa
                     26. Ovaries and young fruits less than twice as long as wide; fruits 8 mm
                          long or less.
                          32. Ovaries and fruits inverted triangular-heart-shaped; axis of inflores-
                               cence and pedicels greatly elongating, the flowers becoming widely
                               spaced and long-pedicelled (pedicels 8–15 mm long)                            Capsella
                          32. Ovaries and fruits not inverted triangular-heart-shaped; axis of inflo-
                               rescence and pedicels elongating gradually and moderately, the flow-
                                                                                           ARABIS /BRASSICACEAE      459

                              ers remaining rather crowded and short-pedicelled (pedicels to ca.
                              10 mm long at most).
                              33. Inflorescences terminal; fruits flattened, elliptic or orbicular in out-
                                  line, the surfaces smooth                                                   Lepidium
                              33. Inflorescences lateral; fruits not flattened, swollen, with 2 subglobose
                                  lobes, the surfaces wrinkled                                               Coronopus


                                           ARABIS ROCKCRESS
Annuals or perennials, glabrous or pubescent with simple hairs; seeds winged.

AA genus of 180 species in the n temperate zone and the Mediterranean to tropical African
mountains; a number are cultivated as ornamentals. (Name from the country, Arabia, accord-
ing to Linnaeus)
REFERENCES: Hopkins 1937; Rollins 1941.

1. Lower stem leaves sessile, entire or slightly toothed; petals white to yellowish white, 3–5 mm
   long, slightly longer than the sepals; fruits drooping; stems glabrous or nearly so             A. canadensis
1. Lower leaves petioled, deeply lobed; petals lavender-pink, 5–7 mm long, nearly twice as long as
   the sepals; fruits erect; stems densely spreading-pubescent below                                A. petiolaris

Arabis canadensis L., (of Canada), SICKLEPOD. Perennial to 90 cm tall; fruits 50–90 mm long, 2–3
mm wide, curved. Woods; Grayson and Tarrant cos., also Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988); e TX w to
East Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. May–Jun.

Arabis petiolaris (A. Gray) A. Gray, (with a petiole or leaf stalk), BRAZOS ROCKCRESS. Annual to
90 cm tall; fruits 40–80 mm long, 3–4 mm wide, nearly straight. Sandy or rocky open ground;
Bell, Burnet, Coleman, and McLennan cos., also Young Co. (Mahler 1988); s and w parts of nc TX
s to Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Apr–May. E

                                                   BRASSICA
Ours all introduced annuals; leaves pinnately dissected or lobed, at least on lower portion of the
stem; petals yellow, rather large and showy.

AAn Eurasian and Mediterranean genus of 35 species of herbs, but sometimes woody; in-
cludes many crop plants such as TURNIP (B. rapa L.), MUSTARD (B. nigra (L.) Koch), B. oleracea
(source of many foods as listed below), and B. napus L., the seeds yielding canola oil or rapeseed
oil. 9 Some species can be poisonous to livestock due to the presence of mustard oil glycosides
(Stephens 1980). (The Latin name of CABBAGE)
REFERENCES: Sun 1946; Lemke & Worthington 1991.

1. Lower stems glabrous or nearly so; mature fruits 3–6 cm or more long; leaves clasping or not so;
   beak of fruits 4 mm long or longer.
   2. Sepals 4–6 mm long.
      3. Upper leaves auricled-clasping                                                                           B. rapa
      3. Upper leaves not auricled-clasping                                                                    B. juncea
   2. Sepals 7–11 mm long                                                                                    B. oleracea
1. Lower stems hirsute; mature fruits 1–2 cm long; leaves not clasping; beak of fruits 1–4 mm long               B. nigraa

Brassica juncea (L.) Czern., (resembling Juncus—rush), CHINESE MUSTARD, LEAF MUSTARD, INDIAN
MUSTARD. Plant to 2 m tall, essentially glabrous, somewhat glaucous; leaves petiolate or the up-
per sessile; siliques 3–6 cm long, with beak 4–8 mm long. Roadsides and fields; se and e TX w to
Blackland Prairie, also one collection is known from Tarrant Co. in the Fort Worth Prairie. Apr–
460   BRASSICACEAE/CAMELINA

May, sporadically to Sep. Native of e Europe and w Asia. This is the most common leaf mustard
used for greens. I

Brassica nigra (L.) W.D.J. Koch, (black), BLACK MUSTARD. Plant to 1.5(–2) m tall, hirsute below, gla-
brous above, green or slightly glaucous above; leaves all petioled, the lower pinnatifid; siliques
quadrangular because of the stout midveins of the valves, closely appressed, with beak 1–4 mm
long. Weedy areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al.
(1990); scattered in TX. May–Aug. Native of Eurasia. The seeds are a main source of table mus-
tard. When the crushed seeds are mixed with “must” of old wine the result is “mustum ardens”
or mustard; the flavor results from the pungent allyl isothiocynate released by enzymatic activ-
ity within 10 minutes of adding liquid to the powdered mustard seeds (Mabberley 1997). I

Brassica oleracea L., (of the vegetable garden, a potherb used in cooking). Plant 0.3–0.9 m tall,
essentially glabrous, glaucous; upper leaves subsessile or wing-petioled, slightly clasping; petals
10–25 mm long; siliques up to 10 cm long, with beak 4–8(–10) mm long. Cultivated, in modified
varieties, as BROCCOLI, BRUSSELS-SPROUTS, CABBAGE, CAULIFLOWER, COLLARDS , ORNAMENTAL
KALE, and KOHLRABI; reseeds in gardens; included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5
(Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); widely scattered in TX. Apr–Jun, sporadically later. Derived from
plants native to coastal Europe. I

Brassica rapa L., (the Latin name for turnip), TURNIP, BIRD’S RAPE, RAPE. Plant 0.4–2 m tall; stems
glabrous, usually glaucous; petals 6–10 mm long; siliques 3–7 cm long, with beak 8–15 mm long.
Commonly cultivated for its root and greens; frequent as an escape and maintaining itself on
roadsides or in waste places, especially in sandy soils; Dallas, Delta, Grayson, Henderson, Hill,
and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. Mid-Mar–early May. Native of
Europe. [B. campestris L.] Cultivated plants have a greatly enlarged taproot; wild ones vary from
with noticeable thickening to none. This species is now often planted with winter WHEAT and
OATS for forage after grain harvesting; it is thus becoming widespread (J. Stanford, pers. comm.);
Burlage (1968) reported it can cause abortion and a decrease in milk flow in cattle. 9 I

                                                CAMELINA
Annual or biennial [?]; pubescence stellate and simple; flowers white to pale yellow; fruits
round, beaked.

AA genus of 6–7 species native to Europe and the Mediterranean to c Asia. McGregor (1985c)
gave a detailed review of the genus in central North America. (Greek: chamai, dwarf, and linon,
flax, from inhibition of flax plants)
REFERENCES: McGregor 1984c, 1985c; Akeroyd 1993.

1. Basal leaf rosette usually withered at flowering time; petals 2–5(–6) mm long; lower stems usu-
   ally with long simple hairs and an understory of branched hairs, the simple hairs sometimes
   absent or rare; stems unbranched or with ascending or erect branches; pedicels 10–15(–20) mm
   long in fruit                                                                                   C. microcarpa
1. Basal leaf rosette green at flowering time; petals (5–)6–9 mm long; lower stems ± densely cov-
   ered with long, simple, unbranched hairs, branched hairs absent or rare; stems usually much
   branched, with spreading or ascending branches; pedicels 7–10(–14) mm long in fruit                C. rumelica
                                                                                                                a

Camelina microcarpa Andrz. ex DC., (small fruited), LITTLEPOD, FALSE FLAX, SMALLSEED FALSE
FLAX. Annual or biennial[?] to 75 cm tall; stems with long spreading pubescence, at least below;
leaves (except lowest) sessile; leaf blades auricled-clasping, oblong- or triangular-lanceolate,
with long ± spreading pubescence (often stellate), ciliate marginally; fruiting raceme elongate,
usually rather dense; petals pale yellow; fruits ca. 5–7 mm in diam.; 2n = 40. Railroads, road-
                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS         461




                                                                        Arabis canadensis [DEL]




Arabis petiolaris [HEA]                         Brassica juncea [ROB]                                    Brassica nigra [REE]




                          Brassica oleracea [SMI]                                  Brassica rapa [SMI]
462   BRASSICACEAE/CAPSELLA

sides, and waste ground; various soils; Collin, Dallas, Grayson, Shackelford, and Tarrant cos.; se
and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Late Mar–May. Native of Europe. I

Camelina rumelica Velen., (of Roumelia, se Europe). Erect annual or biennial[?] 14–30(–60) cm
tall, similar to C. microcarpa; fruiting raceme elongate, lax (less dense); petals white to pale yel-
low; fruits ca. 5–8 mm in diam.; 2n = 12, 26. Along railroads; Denton and Wise cos. (locally abun-
dant); in TX only known from nc part of state and Hemphill and Ochiltree cos. in the Pan-
handle (McGregor 1985c). Late Mar–Apr. Native of Europe. I

                                    CAPSELLA SHEPHERD’S-PURSE
AA temperate and warm area Eurasian genus of 5 species. (Diminutive of Latin: capsa, a box)

Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik., (shepard’s purse, the fruits resembling the scrotum of a
sheep used as a purse by shepherds), SHEPHERD’S-PURSE, PICKPOCKET. Inconspicuously pubescent
annual to 60 cm tall; basal leaves forming a rosette, petioled, the blades pinnatifid; stem leaves
mostly sessile, usually auricled-clasping; flowers usually self-pollinated; petals white or yellow-
ish, rarely absent; fruits inverted triangular-heart-shaped (= obcordate-triangular), flattened, 5–
8 mm long, 3.5–6 mm wide. Roadsides, lawns, and disturbed sites; common, especially in cities
and towns; essentially throughout TX. Reverchon (1880) indicated that it was seen for the first
time in Dallas Co. in 1865. Feb–May. Native of Europe, but now a cosmopolitan weed. Used me-
dicinally by Chinese for eye disease and dysentery; apparently used by humans for 1,000s of
years—collected seeds have been found at an ancient site nearly 8,000 years old (Mabberley
1987). The seeds of SHEPHERD’S PURSE appear to be carnivorous; a chemical released by the seed
appears to attract organisms such as protozoans, nematodes, or mobile bacteria; subsequently,
an enzyme secreted by the seed digests the protein of the victim and allows the seed to absorb
the material (Pietropaolo & Pietropaolo 1986). I

Two forms, treated as species by European authors, occur in nc TX but appear to intergrade.
They are about equally common, and do not appear to be distinct: C. bursa-pastoris, with petals
1.7–2.5 mm long, markedly exceeding the sepals; and C. rubella Reut., with petals 1–1.7 mm
long, shorter than to slightly exceeding the sepals.

                                       CARDAMINE BITTERCRESS
Ours annual or biennial with fibrous roots; basal rosette present; leaves pinnatifid or pinnately
lobed (simple in an e TX species); fruits linear, compressed; seeds in single row in each locule,
wingless.

AA genus of 200 species of temperate areas and tropical mountains; it includes cultivated or-
namentals and weeds. (A Greek name, kardamon, used by Dioscorides for some cress with me-
dicinal uses, perhaps in treating heart problems; presumably from cardia or kardia , heart)

1. Petioles of lower stem leaves ciliate, at least basally; stamens 4; basal leaves larger and more
   conspicuous than the relatively few stem leaves                                                               C. hirsuta
1. Petioles of stem leaves glabrous; stamens 6; basal leaves and lower and middle stem leaves ± similar.
   2. Lateral leaflets narrow; terminal leaflet usually 1–4 mm wide, usually not conspicuously larger
      than laterals; nearly all leaflets distinct, not decurrent along rachis; stems glabrous throughout;
      widespread in e part of nc TX                                                                          C. parvifloraa
   2. Lateral leaflets broad; terminal leaflet usually 4–17 mm wide, usually conspicuously larger than
      laterals; distal leaflets often slightly decurrent along rachis; stems hispid basally; known in nc
      TX only from Dallas Co.                                                                             C. pensylvanica a

Cardamine hirsuta L., (hairy), HAIRY BITTERCRESS. Annual similar to C. parviflora; stems 10–30
cm tall; rosette leaves 3–8 cm long; stem leaves usually smaller; petals white, 2–3 mm long;
                                                                           ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS              463




                            Camelina microcarpa [DEL]
                                                                                              Camelina rumelica [HEA]




Capsella bursa-pastoris [REE]                    Cardamine hirsuta [SCO]             Cardamine parviflora var. arenicola [REE]




                      Cardamine pensylvanica [RYD]                                Chorispora tenella [EN2]
464   BRASSICACEAE/CHORISPORA

styles 0.5 mm or less long; mature fruits 15–25 mm long, ca. 1 mm wide; beak 0.5–1 mm long.
Roadsides, weedy areas; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage (Carr 1994); mainly se and e TX. Feb–
Apr. Native of Europe. I

Cardamine parviflora L. var. arenicola (Britton) O.E. Schulz, (sp.: small-flowered; var.: growing in
sandy places), SAND BITTERCRESS. Glabrous, somewhat delicate annual to 25(–40) cm tall; leaves
mostly 2–4 cm long; petals white, 1.5–3.5 mm long; style 0.2–0.7 mm long; mature fruits
beakless, 20–30 mm long. Damp thickets, ditches, and stream banks; se and e TX w to Grayson
Co., also Edwards Plateau. Late Feb–Apr.

Cardamine pensylvanica Muhl. ex Willd., (of Pennsylvania), BITTERCRESS. Annual or biennial
similar to C. parviflora; plant to 75 cm tall, glabrous except for hispid basal region of stem;
leaves mostly 4–8 cm long; petals white, 1.5–4 mm long; style 0.5–2 mm long; mature fruits
short beaked. Lawns, roadsides, and weed in nursery; Dallas Co; rare; mainly se and e TX. Mar–
Apr, Nov. Brown and Marcus (1998) in a recent paper tentatively indicated that some TX speci-
mens (including the Dallas Co. collection) previously identified as C. pensylvanica are actually
C. debilis D. Don, an introduced Old World species. Schulz (1903), in his monograph of the ge-
nus, treated both of these similar taxa as members of the same species (a variable C. flexuosa
With.). Rollins (1993) indicated that C. debilis has fruits < 1 mm wide and fibrillose roots, while
C. pensylvanica has fruits > 1 mm wide and the roots mostly thicker and scarcely fibrillose.
Examination of the limited material available does not allow us to make a firm determination
and consequently we are tentatively continuing to call this entity C. pensylvanica. However, the
nearly glabrous basal region of the stem (typical of C. debilis), makes us suspicious that Dallas
collections may belong to C. debilis as suggested by Brown and Marcus. Further work on this
complex is needed.

Cardamine bulbosa (Schreb. ex Muhl.) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (bulbous), (BULB BITTERCRESS,
SPRING CRESS), a tuberous perennial with entire or shallowly dentate, simple leaves, occurs in se
and e TX just to the e of nc TX. Jones et al. (1997) recognized this species as [C. rhomboidea
(Pers.) DC.].

                             CHORISPORA BLUE-MUSTARD
AAn e Mediterranean and c Asian genus of 13 species. (Latin: choris, asunder, and spora, seed,
from fruit breaking apart between seeds)

Chorispora tenella (Pall.) DC., (tender, soft), BLUE-MUSTARD. Annual, sparsely stipitate-glandular,
20–50 cm tall; lower leaves sharply incised; sepals 3.5–6 mm long; petals blue-purple, 7–12 mm
long, clawed, with claws longer than blade, the blade 3–5 mm long; fruits indehiscent, breaking
at maturity into 2-seeded segments, 3–4.5 cm long including beak; beak ca. 1–1.5 cm long. Dis-
turbed areas; in TX apparently known only from Dallas, Deaf Smith, El Paso, and Tarrant cos.
Reported as new for TX by Lipscomb (1984). Mar–May. Native of Asia. I

                                         CONRINGIA
AA genus of 6 species native from the Mediterranean and Europe to c Asia. (Named for
Hermann Conring, 1606–1681, professor at Helmstadt, Germany)

Conringia orientalis (L.) Andrz., (eastern), TREACLE HARE’S-EAR, HARE’S-EAR-MUSTARD, HARE’S-
EAR. Glabrous glaucous annual to 110 cm tall; basal rosette absent; leaves oblong to ovate or ob-
long-lanceolate, entire, cordate clasping; petals yellowish white; fruits linear, 4-angled, 8–11 cm
long, 2–3 mm in diam. Along railroads or less often in disturbed areas; gravelly or sandy soils;
Dallas, Denton, Grayson, and Navarro cos., also Tarrant Co. (Mahler 1988); e TX w to East Cross
Timbers. Apr–early May. Native of se Europe. I
                                                                               CORONOPUS/BRASSICACEAE         465

                                     CORONOPUS WARTCRESS
AA nearly cosmopolitan genus of 10 species including weeds. (Greek: korone, crow, and pous,
foot, from the deeply cleft leaves)

Coronopus didymus (L.) Sm., (in pairs, as of stamens), SWINE WARTCRESS. Rank-scented annual,
usually decumbent, slightly pubescent or glabrous; stems 10–40 cm long; leaf blades deeply
pinnatifid, almost compound; flowers in mostly lateral spike-like racemes, borne nearly from
base to tip of stems; sepals green with white margins; petals white, shorter than the sepals;
fruits with 2 lobes, very small, to ca. 1.7 mm long, 2–2.3 mm broad, wrinkled, notched at apex.
Lawns or disturbed areas in cities, towns, chiefly in sandy soils; Dallas and Milam cos.; mainly
se and e TX. Apr–May. Native of s South America. I

                                 DESCURAINIA TANSY-MUSTARD
Annuals or biennials with pinnately compound leaves, the leaflets pinnatifid or again com-
pound, usually pubescent with branched hairs; petals small, yellow to whitish, clawed, slightly
shorter to slightly longer than the greenish yellow sepals.

AA genus of 40 species of temperate and cool n hemisphere areas and s Africa. (Named for
Francois Déscourain, 1658–1740, French apothecary and botanist)
REFERENCES: Detling 1939; Shinners 1949f.

1. Fruits 1.5–2 mm wide, usually 5–12 mm long, ca. as long as to shorter than pedicels, subclavate
   (= somewhat club-like); seeds usually in 2 rows, rarely 1                                           D. pinnata
1. Fruits 0.5–1.5 mm wide, 8–30 mm long, usually distinctly longer than pedicels, linear; seeds al-
   ways in 1 row.
   2. Stem leaves 2–3 times pinnate; petals 2–2.5 mm long, shorter than or equaling the relatively
      long (2–2.5 mm) sepals; fruits 10–30 mm long; upper stems and inflorescences without glan-
      dular pubescence (non-glandular pubescence may be present)                                        D. sophia
   2. Stem leaves once pinnate; petals 1.5–2 mm long, longer than the short (1–1.5 mm) sepals;
      fruits 8–15 mm long; upper stems and inflorescences glandular-pubescent                            D. incana

Descurainia incana (Bernh. ex Fisch. & C.A. Mey.) Dorn subsp. viscosa (Rydb.) Kartesz &
Gandhi, (sp.: hoary, quite gray; subsp.: sticky, clammy). Plant to ca. 120 cm tall. Open areas; in-
cluded based on citation for vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); also Trans-Pecos.
Jun-Sep. [D. richardsonii subsp. viscosa (Rydb.) Detling, Sophia viscosa Rydb.]

Descurainia pinnata (Walter) Britton, (pinnate, feathery). Plant 5–80 cm tall. Open stream bot-
toms, roadsides, and waste ground, often sandy soils. Mar–Apr. Oil can be obtained from the
seeds. There is apparently introgression among the varieties, which are frequently difficult to
distinguish. Subspecies pinnata and subsp. halictorum are particularly difficult to separate and
are here recognized as distinct with some hesitation. Reportedly poisonous to livestock with
symptoms similar to those of selenium poisoning; animals can become blind, wander aim-
lessly, and lose the ability to swallow; the condition is sometimes referred to as blind staggers or
paralyzed tongue (Kingsbury 1964; Stephens 1980; James et al. 1992). 9

1. Leaf blades moderately to densely pubescent, gray-green.
   2. Terminal segment of middle stem leaves elliptic-lanceolate to ovate or rhombic, toothed or
      lobed like the lateral segments, resembling them in size and shape                            subsp.. pinnata
   2. Terminal segment of middle stem leaves oblong-lanceolate to linear, entire or toothed, longer
      and less divided than the lateral segments                                                 subsp. halictorum
1. Leaf blades glabrous (petioles and lower rachis sometimes pubescent), green                  subsp. brachycarpa

subsp. brachycarpa (Richardson) Detling, (short-fruited). Stems with rather abundant gland-
466   BRASSICACEAE/DIPLOTAXIS

tipped hairs but little or no branched pubescence; lobing of leaf blades as in subsp. halictorum.
W part of nc TX w to Panhandle and s to Edwards Plateau. [D. pinnata var. brachycarpa
(Richardson) Fernald]

subsp. halictorum (Cockerell) Detling, (hoary, quite gray). Stems with branched hairs. W part of
nc TX nw to Panhandle and s to Edwards Plateau. [D. pinnata var. osmiarum (Cockerell)
Shinners]

subsp. pinnata. PINNATE TANSY-MUSTARD. Stems with branched hairs. Nearly throughout TX.

Descurainia sophia (L.) Webb ex Prantl, (old generic name), FLIXWEED TANSY-MUSTARD. Plant 15–
80 cm tall. Roadsides and waste ground; various soils; Denton and Grayson cos.; mostly w 1/2
of TX. Apr–May. Native of Europe. The seeds are sometimes used like mustard. I

                                                 DIPLOTAXIS
AA genus of 27 species native to Europe and the Mediterranean to nw India. (Greek: diplous,
double, and taxis, row or arrangement, alluding to the biserrate seeds or with two shields)

Diplotaxis muralis (L.) DC., (of walls), STINKING WALLROCKET, SANDROCKET, WALLROCKET. Ill-
scented, inconspicuously hispid annual to perennial, to 60 cm tall; leaves crowded near base,
rather thick and fleshy, the blades toothed or pinnatifid; flowers few in elongated racemes; petals
5–8 mm long, sulfur yellow to lavender; fruits 20–35 mm long, 1–2 mm in diam. Road margins,
limestone areas; Collin, Dallas, Ellis, Grayson, and Hamilton cos.; also Edwards Plateau; first col-
lected in TX in 1947 (Cory 1948a). Mar–Sep. Native of Europe. I

                                      DRABA WHITLOW-GRASS
Ours small annuals, pubescent, the hairs simple or branched; petals white or absent.

AA genus of ca. 300 species of n temperate and boreal areas and mountains of South America;
some are cultivated as rock-garden ornamentals; it is the largest genus in the family. (Greek:
drabe, acrid; applied by Dioscorides to some cress)
REFERENCES: Fernald 1934; Hartman et al. 1975.

1. Mature fruits 2–4(–5) mm long, 0.6–1 mm wide; leaves of main stem more than twice as long as
   wide, narrowly oblong or oblanceolate, entire; plants pubescent with sessile branched hairs
                                                                                                        D. brachycarpa
1. Mature fruits 5–15 mm long, 1–3 mm wide; leaves of main stem (at first all nearly basal) usually
   not more than twice as long as wide, entire or toothed; plants with either simple hairs or stalked
   branched hairs (use hand lens or conspicuous with a dissecting scope).
   2. Leaves entire; fruits erect or strongly ascending on glabrous pedicels; fruits usually glabrous
                                                                                                            D. reptans
  2. Leaves with 1 or more pairs of coarse teeth; fruits widely spreading on pubescent pedicels;
     fruits often with short hairs.
     3. Fruits lanceolate-elliptic, usually 5–8 mm long, 2–3 mm wide; stem leaves 4–10, scattered
        up the stem; stems with largely simple pubescence                                                D. platycarpa
     3. Fruits elliptic to oblong, 8–16 mm long, 1–3 mm wide; stem leaves 1–7 (or apparently none),
        crowded near base; stems with spreading, stalked, branched pubescence                             D. cuneifolia

Draba brachycarpa Nutt. ex Torr. & A. Gray, (short-fruited), SHORT-POD DRABA. Stems erect, to ca.
20 cm tall; basal leaves to ca. 15 mm long; petals absent or 1.2–3 mm long; fruits glabrous or his-
pid. Woods, roadsides, and open ground; sandy soils; e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards
Plateau. Feb–Mar.
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS           467




                                       Coronopus didymus [BB1]                      Descurainia incana subsp. viscosa [ABR]




Conringia orientalis [ROB]




                                   Descurainia pinnata subsp. pinnata [EN1]               Descurainia sophia [SMI]




        Diplotaxis muralis [BB2]                                      Draba brachycarpa [EN1]
468   BRASSICACEAE/ERUCASTRUM

Draba cuneifolia Nutt. ex Torr. & A. Gray, (wedge-leaved), WEDGE-LEAF DRABA, WHITLOW-WORT.
Similar to D. platycarpa; stems erect, to ca. 30 cm tall. Sandy and gravelly soils; nearly through-
out TX. Late Feb–Apr.

Draba platycarpa Torr. & A. Gray, (broad-fruited), BROAD-POD DRABA. Petals 3–3.5 mm long,
rarely absent. Rocky slopes, bare spots in prairies, disturbed sites, sand or calcareous clay; e
Blackland Prairie w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Mar–Apr, main period 1 or 2 weeks
later than D. cuneifolia.

Draba reptans (Lam.) Fernald, (creeping), CAROLINA DRABA. Petals absent or 3–4 mm long. Open
woods, fields, and roadsides, sandy or rocky soils; Blackland Prairie w to High Plains. Feb–Mar.
[D. reptans (Lam.) Fernald var. micrantha (Nutt.) Fernald]

                                              ERUCASTRUM
AA genus of 20 species native to the Mediterranean, c and s Europe, and Macaronesia. (Latin:
resembling Eruca, a Mediterranean genus whose name derives from the Latin name for an ed-
ible species)
REFERENCE: Luken et al. 1993.

Erucastrum gallicum (Willd.) O.E. Schulz, (of Gaul or France), ROCKETSALAD , ROCKETWEED,
DOG-MUSTARD. Annual to 60(–80) cm tall; leaf blades deeply pinnatifid, the lobes coarsely
toothed, obtuse; petals 7–8 mm long, pale yellow; fruits 2–4 cm long, 1–2 mm wide. Roadsides
and railroads; Grayson Co., also Denton, Hill, and Tarrant cos. (Mahler 1988); nc TX s to
Edwards Plateau; first collected in the U.S. in Wisconsin in 1903 and in Texas in 1926 (Luken et
al. 1993). Late Mar–Apr. Native of Europe. I

                                     ERYSIMUM WALLFLOWER
Annuals or perennials, gray with minute, appressed, simple or both simple and stellate hairs;
leaves linear-lanceolate to oblong, entire, toothed, or pinnatifid; petals long-clawed.

AA genus of ca. 200 species of the Mediterranean, Europe, Asia, and North America; it in-
cludes weeds and cultivated ornamentals. (Greek: eryomai, help or save, from supposed medici-
nal properties of some species or eryo, to draw out, alluding to the blistering properties of some
species)
REFERENCE: Rossbach 1958.

1. Petals greenish yellow, 5–8 mm long; pedicels 2–4 mm long                                          E. repandum
1. Petals yellow to orange-red, 15–25 mm long; pedicels 5–10 mm long.
   2. Petals yellow (rarely orange-yellow); mature fruits widely spreading, usually 8–12 cm long;
      plants often 40 cm or less tall                                                                  E. asperum
   2. Petals yellow to orange or orange-red; mature fruits erect (rarely merely ascending), usually
      5–8 cm long; plants usually 40–100 cm tall                                                      E. capitatum

Erysimum asperum (Nutt.) DC., (rough), WESTERN WALLFLOWER. Perennial to 40(–75) cm tall.
Limestone outcrops, hillsides, prairies; Lampasas and Wise cos., also Limestone Co. (Mahler
1988); nc TX w to Plains Country. Apr–May. m/89

Erysimum capitatum (Douglas ex Hook.) Greene, (headed), PLAINS ERYSIMUM, WESTERN WALL-
FLOWER, PRAIRIE-ROCKET. Coarse biennial or perennial [?] to 40–100 cm tall; young plants with-
out mature fruits are often very similar to E. asperum. Rocky outcrops, roadcuts, dry stream-
beds, open wooded slopes; Limestone Co.; Post Oak Savannah w through much of TX. Apr–Jun.

Erysimum repandum L., (with wavy margins), SPREADING ERYSIMUM, BUSHY WALLFLOWER. An-
nual to ca. 40 cm tall; fruits 4–7 cm long. Railroads and roadsides, various soils; Callahan,
                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       469




                                       Draba platycarpa [BT3]                        Draba reptans [GLE]




 Draba cuneifolia [BT3]




                           Erucastrum gallicum [MUE]                        Erysimum asperum [BB1]




Erysimum capitatum [ABR]          Erysimum repandum [BB2]                      Iodanthus pinnatifidus [ BB2]
470   BRASSICACEAE/IODANTHUS

Cooke, Dallas, Grayson, and Somervell cos., also Denton Co. (Mahler 1988); nc TX s to Edwards
Plateau and se TX, apparently spreading; first collected in TX in Pecos Co. in 1944 (Cory 1947,
1948a, 1950). Apr–May. Native of Europe. I

                                                  IODANTHUS
AA genus of 4 species, 1 in e North America and 3 in Mexico. (Greek: iodes, violet-colored, and
anthos, flower)
REFERENCE: Rollins 1942.

Iodanthus pinnatifidus (Michx.) Steud., (pinnately cut), PURPLE-ROCKET. Perennial, glabrous or
nearly so; stems erect, 30–100 cm tall; leaves ovate to lanceolate, usually sharply toothed; lower
leaves 5–20 cm long, usually with winged petioles with small lobes and basal auricles clasping
the stem; upper leaves sessile and cuneate; sepals erect, often purplish, 3–5 mm long; petals
white to lavender; fruits 2–4 cm long, linear. Low and rich woods; included based on citation of
vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); c and e TX. Apr–Jun.

                             LEPIDIUM PEPPERWEED, PEPPER-GRASS
Our species annuals; leaves mostly toothed or pinnatifid; flowers small; petals white or absent.

AA cosmopolitan, but especially temperate genus of ca. 140 species. The fruits of some have a
tasty, peppery flavor; a number have been cultivated as salad plants and are usually eaten at
cotyledon or seedling stage. (Greek: lepidion, little scale, alluding to the fruit)
REFERENCES: Hitchcock 1936, 1945; Al-Shehbaz 1986a.

1. Uppermost leaves deeply toothed or lobed; stem leaves rather uniform in size, deeply pinnatifid;
   plants prostrate to ascending, usually much branched near base                                           L. oblongum
1. Uppermost leaves entire or nearly so; stem leaves gradually much reduced upward, the lower
   leaves toothed to deeply pinnatifid, the upper shallowly pinnatifid to entire; plants ± erect,
   usually single stemmed below, branched above.
   2. Stems glabrous or minutely and inconspicuously pubescent.
      3. Lower leaves usually bipinnatifid; fruits 1–2(–2.5) mm broad, ovate to broadly elliptic;
         plants ill-smelling                                                                                   L. ruderale
      3. Lower leaves usually incised to pinnatifid, not bipinnatifid; fruits 2–3.3 mm broad, elliptic to
         orbicular; plants usually not ill-smelling.
         4. Pedicels about as long as fruits or shorter; petals rudimentary, shorter than sepals OR
            petals absent; fruits 2–3.5 mm long                                                           L. densiflorum
         4. Pedicels usually slightly longer than the fruits; petals typically conspicuous, usually as
            long as or longer than sepals; fruits 2.5–4.2 mm long                                           L. virginicum
   2. Stems moderately to densely hispid-pilose, the hairs conspicuous (with a hand lens) and
      spreading at right angles                                                                             L. austrinum

Lepidium austrinum Small, (southern), SOUTHERN PEPPERWEED. Similar to L. virginicum; petals
frequently absent. Disturbed areas; mainly Blackland Prairie w to Rolling Plains and s to s TX.
Late Mar–May. Apparently hybridizes introgressively with L. virginicum.

Lepidium densiflorum Schrad., (densely-flowered), PRAIRIE PEPPERWEED, GREEN-FLOWER PEPPER-
GRASS. Plant somewhat erect, to ca. 50 cm tall; basal leaves usually deeply serrate-incised, rarely
somewhat pinnatifid; fruits ovate or rarely suborbicular. Sandy soils in disturbed areas; Brown
Co. on western margin of nc TX; scattered nearly throughout TX. Feb–Jun.

Lepidium oblongum Small, (oblong), VEINY PEPPERWEED. Stems prostrate to ascending, much
branched from base, to ca. 20 cm long, minutely pubescent; basal leaves pinnatifid to
                                                                       ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS              471




                                              Lepidium densiflorum [ABR]                          Lepidium ruderale [SMI]



Lepidium austrinum [BT3]




                   Lepidium oblongum [HEA]
                                                                                                 Lepidium virginicum [REE]




                   Lesquerella angustifolia [HEA]                          Lesquerella auriculata [HEA]
472   BRASSICACEAE/LESQUERELLA

bipinnatifid; petals minute or absent. Sandy or silty ground; Tarrant Co. (Mahler 1988); mainly
Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau w to w TX. Mid-Mar–Apr.

Lepidium ruderale L., (of rubbish). Stems to ca. 30 cm tall; basal leaves usually bipinnatifid,
rarely only pinnatifid. Roadsides, waste places, and disturbed areas; included based on citation
for vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); scattered in e 1/2 of TX. Mar–Jul.
Native of Europe. I

Lepidium virginicum L., (of Virginia), VIRGINIA PEPPER-GRASS, POORMAN’S-PEPPER, AMERICAN PEPPER-
GRASS, LENTEJILLA. Plant erect, to 60 cm tall; basal leaves usually pinnatifid; inflorescences at
least sparingly pubescent; pedicels terete; petals usually longer than the sepals, linear-oblan-
ceolate to obovate, rarely shorter or absent; fruits usually nearly orbicular, less often broadly el-
liptic to obovate. Usually sandy soils, disturbed areas; throughout TX. Mar–May. Two varieties,
var. medium (Greene) C.L. Hitchc. and var. virginicum, are sometimes recognized (Kartesz
1994). Variety medium supposedly differs in having the inflorescences usually glabrous and the
pedicels slightly inflated. However, consistent differences in nc TX material could not be found.

                        LESQUERELLA BLADDERPOD, WILD MUSTARD
Low, pubescent or scurfy annuals or perennials; hairs usually branched or stellate, the rays
sometimes fused and the hairs then semi-peltate or peltate and scale-like; leaves (except lowest)
sessile or subsessile, entire or toothed or pinnatifid; flowers in racemes; petals yellow; fruits glo-
bose or nearly so.

AA North American genus of 40 species. (Named for Leo Lesquereux, 1805–1889, distin-
guished American bryologist and paleobotanist)
REFERENCES: Payson 1921; Rollins 1955, 1956; Rollins & Shaw 1973; Clark 1975; Nixon et al. 1983.

1. Plants annual (rarely biennial), not from a woody base; petals (including claw) usually 4–8 mm
   long; fruits 3–6 mm long (to 7 mm in L. gordonii).
   2. Stem leaves distinctly auriculate.
      3. Lower stems pubescent with appressed branched hairs; stems 20–70 cm long; sepals ca. 4–
         6 mm long                                                                                        L. grandifloraa
      3. Lower stems with spreading simple hairs; stems to ca. 22 cm long; sepals ca. 3–4 mm long
                                                                                                           L. auriculata
   2. Stem leaves not auriculate or only obscurely so.
      4. Fruiting pedicels uniformly recurved (= bent downward) and the fruits therefore pendant;
         buds when ready to open (yellow-green in color, petals not yet visible) 2.5–3.5 mm long
                                                                                                            L. recurvata
      4. Fruiting pedicels various but not uniformly recurved; buds when ready to open 4–6 mm in
         diam.
         5. Pedicels sigmoid (curved into an S-shape); mainly West Cross Timbers w to w TX                   L. gordonii
         5. Pedicels straight or simply curved, not sigmoid; distribution various.
            6. Inflorescence dense, the flowers crowded at end of stem; inflorescence closely sub-
               tended by upper leaves even after fruit has formed; stellate hairs ca. 0.3–0.4 mm across
               (with a dissecting scope), distinctly hair-like; in nc TX known only from s Grand Prairie    L. densifloraa
            6. Inflorescence quickly elongating, not dense, the flowers not crowded at end of stem;
               inflorescence separated a short distance from the uppermost leaves by the time a few
               flowers have opened; stellate hairs ca. 0.1–0.2 mm across, so small as to appear almost
               scale-like; widespread.
               7. Stem leaves 4–10 cm long, 1–3.5 mm wide; ovules 2 per locule; fruits with a minute
                  stipe (0.5 mm or less long) or none connecting it to the pedicel; in nc TX only known
                  from Red River Co.                                                                     L. angustifolia
                                                                                    LESQUERELLA/BRASSICACEAE           473

              7. Stem leaves 1–5 cm long, 2–20 mm wide; ovules 8–10 per locule; fruits with a stipe
                 (ca. 0.75–2 mm long) connecting it to the pedicel; widespread                                   L. gracilis
1. Plants perennial from a woody base; petals usually 8–12 mm long; fruits 4.5–8 mm long.
   8. Plants densely pubescent and grayish green but not conspicuously silvery-gray; inflorescence
      dense and crowded at end of stem; rays (= branches) of stellate hairs free or fused basally only
      (use dissecting scope); fruits with stipe ca. 0.5–1 mm long; style 4–8 mm long                       L. engelmannii
   8. Plants conspicuously silvery-gray pubescent; inflorescence usually elongated and loose (at least
      with age); rays of stellate hairs fused together from their base to 1/2 their length; fruits usually
      without a stipe or occasionally with a very short stipe; style 3–5 mm long                                L. fendlerii

Lesquerella angustifolia (Nutt. ex Torr. & A. Gray) S. Watson, (narrow-leaved), NARROW-LEAF
BLADDERPOD. Annual with stems to ca. 40 cm long; stems and leaves scurfy with peltate or
semi-peltate hairs. Rocky limestone soils; central Red River Co. in extreme ne part of nc TX and
nearby OK; rare. Apr–May.

Lesquerella auriculata (Engelm. & A. Gray) S. Watson, (eared, with an ear-shaped appendage),
EAR -LEAF BLADDERPOD. Annual densely hirsute with long simple hairs and shorter several-
rayed ones beneath; stems erect to decumbent, to 22 cm long; basal leaves dentate to lyrate,
sometimes nearly entire; cauline leaves 1–4 cm long, 3–10 mm wide, sessile and auriculate;
fruits 4–6 mm long, globose to slightly longer than broad. Prairies and disturbed soils;
Kaufman Co. (Reverchon collection in 1903, “sands, common”), also Navarro Co. (Rollins &
Shaw 1973); ne Blackland Prairie e to e TX. Mar–May.

Lesquerella densiflora (A. Gray) S. Watson, (densely flowered), DENSE-FLOWER BLADDERPOD. An-
nual or biennial with erect to decumbent stems to ca. 40 cm long; stems and leaves rather
densely pubescent with loosely appressed, stellate hairs; leaves rather numerous and crowded,
elliptic- or oblong-lanceolate; fruits 2.5–4.5 mm long. Sandy or gravelly ground; Burnet and
Somervell cos., also Brown, Comanche, Eastland, Hood, Palo Pinto (Rollins & Shaw 1973), and
McLennan (Mahler 1988) cos.; mainly s Grand Prairie s to Edwards Plateau and w to Rolling
Plains; endemic to TX. Late Mar–Apr. E

Lesquerella engelmannii (A. Gray) S. Watson, (for George Engelmann, 1809–1884, German-born
botanist and physician of St. Louis), ENGELMANN’S BLADDERPOD. Perennial with several stems to
ca. 50 cm tall; stems and leaves silvery with dense, appressed, stellate pubescence; stem leaves
linear to narrowly oblong-oblanceolate; raceme at first short, umbel-like; fruits 5.5–5.8 mm
long; ovules 5–8 per locule. Rocky limestone slopes; Cooke, Dallas, Ellis, Erath, Parker, Tarrant,
and Wise cos., also Lampasas Co. (Rollins & Shaw 1973); Blackland Prairie to West Cross Tim-
bers s to s TX. Apr–May.

Lesquerella fendleri (A. Gray) S. Watson, (for August Fendler, 1813–1883, one of the first bota-
nists to collect in New Mexico and Venezuela), FENDLER’S BLADDERPOD, POPWEED. Perennial to
40 cm tall, branched from base, conspicuously silvery-gray pubescent by stellate hairs with
rays fused to about middle; fruits 4.6–8 mm long, globose to broadly ellipsoid or ovoid; ovules
10–16 per locule. Roadsides, open sandy or rocky, often calcareous soils; Shackelford Co., also
Brown and Coryell cos. (Rollins & Shaw 1973); w part of nc TX w to w TX. Apr.

Lesquerella gordonii (A. Gray) S. Watson, (for James Gordon, d. ca. 1781, correspondent of
Linnaeus and London nurseryman), GORDON’S BLADDERPOD, POPWEED, BEADPOP. Stellate pubes-
cent annual; stems prostrate, decumbent or erect, to 40 cm long, usually branched; fruits 4–7
mm long, ca. globose to broadly ellipsoid. Sandy and gravelly soils; Brown, Burnet, Callahan,
Shacklelford, Somervell, and Young cos., also Comanche, Eastland, Jack, and Johnson cos.
(Rollins & Shaw 1973); mainly West Cross Timbers w to w TX. Mar–Jun. The dry fruits pop
when stepped on giving rise to the common name (Kirkpatrick 1992).
474   BRASSICACEAE/MATTHIOLA

Lesquerella gracilis (Hook.) S. Watson, (graceful). Annual with erect to decumbent stems to 50
cm tall, younger parts gray with appressed, stellate pubescence, older parts sparsely pubescent
and green; fruits 3–5 mm in diam. Prairies, roadsides, and disturbed ground, calcareous clay.
Late Mar–May.

1. Fruits globose to ellipsoid                                                                     subsp. gracilis
1. Fruits obpyriform (= pear-shaped with attachment at narrow end), usually with a distinct basal
   shoulder                                                                                       subsp. nuttallii

subsp. gracilis (Hook.) S. Watson, WHITE BLADDERPOD , LAX BLADDERPOD , PEAR -FRUIT
BLADDERPOD, CLOTH-OF-GOLD. Blackland Prairie and Grand Prairie; nc to sc TX.

subsp. nuttallii (Torr. & A. Gray) Rollins & E.A. Shaw, (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, En-
glish-American botanist). Dallas, Grayson, and Kaufman cos. (Rollins & Shaw 1973); ne TX. [L.
nuttallii (Torr. & A. Gray) S. Watson, L. gracilis (Hook.) S. Watson var. repanda (Nutt.) Payson]

Lesquerella grandiflora (Hook.) S. Watson, (large-flowered), BIG-FLOWER BLADDERPOD. Annual
(biennial?) with erect to decumbent stems to 70 cm long, densely pubescent with often 5-rayed
hairs; basal leaves dentate to bipinnatifid; fruits 4–6 mm long, globose or slightly longer than
broad. Loose sandy soils; included based on citation for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et
al. (1990); n to at least Travis Co. just s of nc TX (Rollins & Shaw 1973); s and c TX; endemic to
TX. Mar–Apr. E

Lesquerella recurvata (Engelm. ex A. Gray) S. Watson, (curved backward), SLENDER BLADDERPOD.
Resembling smaller, delicate forms of L. gracilis; stems scurfy with peltate or semi-stellate hairs;
leaves stellate-pubescent with subappressed hairs. Limestone outcrops and gravelly calcareous
prairies; mainly Blackland and Grand prairies from Ellis, Hood, and Johnson cos. s to c TX; en-
demic to TX. Mar–Apr. E

                                         MATTHIOLA STOCK
A An Old World genus of 55 species native to w Europe, the Mediterranean region, and
Macaronesia; some are cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for Pietro Andrea Matthiola, 1500–
1577, Italian botanist and physician)

Matthiola longipetala (Vent.) DC., (long-petaled), EVENINGSTOCK, PERFUMEPLANT, GILLIFLOWER,
STOCK. Annual or biennial with dense, grayish, branched pubescence; leaves linear-lanceolate
to lanceolate, entire to dentate; flowers sessile, lilac or purple, fragrant; petals 1.5–2 cm long;
fruits 7–10 cm long, forked apically into 2 conspicuous horns. Escapes from cultivation, weedy
areas; Bell Co., also Edwards Plateau. Spring–summer. Native of the Old World. [M. bicornis
(Sibth. & Sm.) DC.] I

                                                MYAGRUM
AA monotypic genus native of the Mediterranean area and c Europe to India. (Greek: myo,
mouse, and agra, trap)

Myagrum perfoliatum L., (perfoliate, with leaves surrounding the stem). Glabrous annual to 70(–
100) cm tall; stem leaves sessile, auricled-clasping, mostly entire, oblong- or triangular-lan-
ceolate; flowers crowded, in spike-like racemes; petals light yellow, 3–4 mm long; fruits roughly
triangular (club-shaped, much wider distally), ca. 5–6 mm long. Fields and roadsides in black
clay; Dallas, Delta, Fannin, Grayson, and Johnson cos., also Denton (C. Taylor, pers. obs.) and
Rockwall (VDB) cos. and Bryan Co., OK (C. Taylor, pers. obs.); also Edwards Plateau; thought to
have been introduced into Texas (Delta Co.) with vetch seed from Oregon in 1949 (Cory 1950);
abundant and spreading. Apr–May. Native of the Mediterranean area and c Europe to Iran. I
                                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS           475




                      Lesquerella densiflora [HEA]




                                                                                                 Lesquerella engelmannii [GR1]




   Lesquerella fendleri [HEA]                                       Lesquerella gracilis subsp. gracilis [BB2, SHI]




Lesquerella gordonii [AMB]                      Lesquerella grandiflora [AMB]                        Lesquerella recurvata [AMB]
476   BRASSICACEAE/RAPHANUS

                                            RAPHANUS RADISH
AA genus of 3 species native to w and c Europe and the Mediterranean region to c Asia.
(Greek: raphanos, quickly appearing, alluding to the rapid germination; classical Greek name
for radish)

Raphanus sativus L., (cultivated), RADISH, RABANO. Sparsely hispid or nearly glabrous annual
25–125 cm tall, with swollen taproot; larger leaves pinnatifid, with large terminal lobe; petals
white to rosy or lavender, 15–22 mm long; fruits 4–5 cm long, 6–10 mm in diam. Commonly
cultivated throughout TX and sometimes a transitory escape; included based on citation of
vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990). Cultivated since time of Assyrians and
probably of hybrid origin (Mabberley 1987). Exact place of origin unknown; European or Asi-
atic. I

                                                  RAPISTRUM
AAn Old World genus of 2 species native of c Europe, the Mediterranean region, and w Asia.
(Latin name of the wild rape)
REFERENCE: Lemke & Worthington 1991.

Rapistrum rugosum (L.) All., (rugose, wrinkled). Annual, resembling species of Brassica, gla-
brous or sparsely hispid; stems 0.3–0.8 m tall; lower leaves pinnatifid to coarsely dentate; stem
leaves few, smaller, dentate; petals 5–10 mm long, yellow; pedicels 2–5 mm long; fruits 3–9 mm
long including beak, of 2 segments; upper fruit segment nearly globose, ca. 3 mm in diam., one-
seeded, larger than the lower segment, abruptly contracted to the beak; lower fruit segment
one-seeded or seedless, cylindrical, appearing like a thickened extension of the pedicel; beak of
fruit 1–3 mm long. Fields and roadsides; Grayson and Kaufman cos. s to Bell and Milam cos.;
Blackland Prairie; also se and e TX and Edwards Plateau; apparently increasing. Apr–early May.
Native of the Mediterranean region. I

                                        RORIPPA YELLOWCRESS
Annuals or perennials; our species glabrous or nearly so; leaves simple or compound, toothed or
pinnatifid; petals white or yellow, small or absent; seeds not winged.

AA nearly cosmopolitan genus of 80 species. (From the old Saxon word, rorippen, for plants of
this genus)
REFERENCES: Green 1962; Stuckey 1972.

1. Petals white; leaves pinnately compound                                                   R. nasturtium-aquaticum
1. Petals yellow OR absent; leaves simple (but may be deeply pinnatifid).
   2. Fruits (siliques) sessile or pedicels to 1.5 mm long; petals absent or rarely 1 present            R. sessiliflora
                                                                                                                       a
   2. Fruits pedicellate with pedicels 2 mm long or longer; petals present.
      3. Pedicels about equal to fruits in length; fruits usually 3–9 mm long; seeds 0.5–0.9 mm long;
         vesicular (= sac-like) hairs absent, the plants glabrous or with pointed hairs                    R. palustris
      3. Pedicels much shorter than fruits; fruits usually 10–15 mm long; seeds 0.4–0.5 mm long;
         vesicular hairs present on lower part of stem or foliage                                              R. teres

Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum (L.) Hayek, (aquatic nasturtium, from Latin, nasi tortium, a
twisted nose, from the plant’s pungent qualities), WATERCRESS. Aquatic to semiaquatic perennial;
stems floating, creeping, or ascending, rooting at the nodes; leaflets oblong- to rhombic-orbicu-
lar, entire or shallowly and bluntly toothed; petals 3–4 mm long. Shallow, fairly clear water, in
streams or springs, sometimes stranded in wet mud; Bell, Burnet, Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant
cos., also Johnson Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); widely scattered in TX. Apr–Jun. Native of Eu-
rope. [Nasturtium officinale W.T. Aiton, Sisymbrium nasturtium-aquaticum L.] I
                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS             477




                                                      Myagrum perfoliatum [GLE, LAM]




Matthiola longipetala [HEA]




                                                         Raphanus sativus [LAM]




    Rapistrum rugosum [ALL]   Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum [REE]          Rorippa palustris subsp. fernaldiana [GLE]
478   BRASSICACEAE/SIBARA

Rorippa palustris (L.) Besser subsp. fernaldiana (Butters & Abbe) Jonsell, (sp.: marsh-loving;
subsp.: for Merritt Lyndon Fernald, 1893–1950, author of Gray’s Manual of Botany, 8th ed.), BOG
YELLOWCRESS, BOG MARSHCRESS. Annual to 80 cm tall, usually erect, branched above, essentially
glabrous, without vesicular hairs; lower leaves lobed; upper leaves toothed; petals usually 1–2
mm long; fruits short-cylindrical to ellipsoid, usually 3–9 mm long, the replum becoming
twisted when dry. Margins of lakes and streams; Cooke and Dallas cos.; mainly se and e TX w to
Grand Prairie and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Sep. [R. palustris (L.) Besser var. fernaldiana (Butters &
Abbe) Stuckey, R. islandica of TX auth., not (Oeder) Borbás]

Rorippa sessiliflora (Nutt.) Hitchc., (stalk-less-flowered), STALK-LESS YELLOWCRESS. Glabrous
summer, fall, or winter annual; stems to 50 cm tall, erect, single to much-branched; leaves en-
tire, repand or somewhat toothed; sepals greenish yellow; petals absent or rarely 1 present; fruits
thick, can be over 2 mm wide, 6–10 mm long, sessile or on pedicels 0.5–1.5 mm long. Shores of
streams and lakes; Bell, Cooke, Dallas, and Hopkins cos., also Brown (HPC) and Tarrant (R.
O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; se and e TX w to Grand Prairie and Edwards Plateau. Apr–May, less
commonly Aug–Sep.

Rorippa teres (Michx.) Stuckey, (terete, circular in cross-section), TANSY-LEAF YELLOWCRESS. An-
nual with erect to decumbent, usually branched stems to 40 cm long; vesicular hairs obovate to
clavate on lower part of stems and upper leaf surfaces of lower leaves; leaves deeply pinnatifid;
petals 1(–2) mm long; pedicels 2–5 mm long; fruits (5–)10–15(–18) mm long. Wet thickets,
stream banks, sandy soils; Dallas Co. (Cedar Hill–R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.), also cited for vegeta-
tional area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX w to Edwards Plateau and Trans-
Pecos. Mar–Apr, sporadically later.

                                                       SIBARA
AA genus of 10 species native to e and s North America. (An anagram of Arabis)
REFERENCE: Rollins 1947.

Sibara virginica (L.) Rollins, (of Virginia), VIRGINIA SIBARA. Annual to 35 cm tall, similar in ap-
pearance to Cardamine parviflora ; stems often numerous, sparsely pubescent toward base;
basal rosette of leaves present; basal leaves pinnately dissected with 5–14 pairs of lateral divi-
sions; stem leaves similar but reduced; racemes 10–20 cm long; petals white or with tinge of
pink, 2.5–3 mm long; fruits 15–30 mm long, ca. 1.2–2 mm wide, flattened. Wet thickets, ditches,
disturbed areas; se and e TX w to Edwards Plateau and Rolling Plains. Feb–Apr.

                                              SINAPIS MUSTARD
Our species introduced annuals; leaves not clasping, at least the lower pinnatifid; petals yellow,
rather large and showy; beak of silique large, usually containing a seed.

AA genus of 7 species of Europe and the Mediterranean region; sometimes included in Bras-
sica. As in the related genus Brassica (e.g., Brassica nigra), the seeds of Sinapis alba are a source
of edible mustard. 9 Some species can be poisonous to livestock due to the presence of mus-
tard oil glycosides (Stephens 1980). (Latin: sinapis, mustard, from flavor of seeds)
REFERENCES: Sun 1946; Lemke & Worthington 1991.

1. Leaves all pinnatifid; fruits bristly, 3–4 mm in diam., the beak 1–2 times longer than the fruit body;
   seeds 4–8 per fruit                                                                                          S. alba
1. Middle and upper leaves merely toothed; fruits glabrous or sparsely bristly, 1.5–2.5 mm in diam.,
   the beak shorter than or equal to fruit body in length; seeds 7–13 per fruit                             S. arvensis

Sinapis alba L., (white), WHITE MUSTARD. Rough hairy annual to 70 cm tall; siliques 15–35 mm
long, the beak 10–20(–rarely more) mm long, flat, often curved. Weedy areas; included based on
                                                                               SISYMBRIUM/BRASSICACEAE        479

citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); scattered in TX. Probably
native of Mediterranean region. [Brassica hirta Moench] Cultivated for its mustard-producing
seeds and for greens. I

Sinapis arvensis L., (pertaining to cultivated fields), FIELD MUSTARD, CHARLOCK. Annual to 80
cm tall; stems spreading pubescent; siliques 20–45 mm long, the beak quadrangular-flattened,
6–15 mm long. Fields, roadsides, and railroads, various soils; se and e TX w to West Cross Tim-
bers and Edwards Plateau. Feb–May. Native of Europe. [Brassica kaber (DC.) L.C. Wheeler] Poi-
soning and death have been reported in cattle, chickens, horses, and pigs from eating large
quantities of the plant or seeds (Mulligan & Munro 1990) 9 I

                                               SISYMBRIUM
Our species small to robust annuals, glabrous or sparsely pubescent with simple hairs; leaves
unevenly pinnatifid, often with large apical section; petals light yellow.

AA genus of 90 species of Eurasia, the Mediterranean region, s Africa, North America, and the
Andes. (Latinized from an ancient Greek name for some plant of this family)
REFERENCE: Payson 1922a.

1. Terminal lobe of upper leaves linear-oblong or linear; petals 5–10 mm long; pedicels spreading-
   ascending; mature fruits 3.5–10 cm long                                                         S. altissimum
1. Terminal lobe of upper leaves triangular; petals 2.5–4 mm long; pedicels spreading-ascending
   OR closely appressed; mature fruits 1–5 cm long.
   2. Pedicels spreading-ascending in age, 4–10 mm long; stems glabrous; mature fruits 3–5 cm
      long                                                                                                  S. irio
   2. Pedicels closely appressed in age, 1–2 mm long; stems sparingly hispid-pubescent at least
      below; mature fruits 1–2 cm long                                                               S. officinale

Sisymbrium altissimum L., (tallest), TUMBLE-MUSTARD. Plant to 1.5 m tall; lower leaves and stems
sparsely pilose. Railroads and roadsides; Dallas Co.; scattered in TX. Native of Europe and w
Asia. I

Sisymbrium irio L., (Latin name for a siliquose plant), ROCKET-MUSTARD, LONDON-ROCKET. Plant
to 0.6 m tall. Fields, roadsides, and waste ground, various soils; Dallas and Brown cos.; wide-
spread in TX. Feb–May, Nov on further s. Native of Europe. I

Sisymbrium officinale (L.) Scop., (medicinal), HEDGE-MUSTARD, TANSY-MUSTARD. Plant to 1.2 m
tall. Fields, thickets, and waste ground, various soils; Cooke, Denton, and Grayson cos., also
McLennan and Navarro cos. (Mahler 1988); widespread in TX. Apr–Jun. Native of Europe. [S.
officinale var. leiocarpum DC.] I

                                STREPTANTHUS TWISTFLOWER
AA genus of 35 species of w and s North America. Calluses on the leaf margins of some spe-
cies mimic pierid butterfly eggs, reducing egg deposition and thus herbivory by larvae (Buck et
al. 1993). Some species are known to hyperaccumulate nickel (Kruckeberg & Reeves 1995).
(Greek: streptos, twisted, and anthos, flower, from the wavy-margined petals)

Streptanthus hyacinthoides Hook., (resembling Hyacinthus—hyacinth), SMOOTH TWISTFLOWER.
Erect, glabrous annual to 1 m tall; basal leaves absent; leaves linear-lanceolate; sepals deep
purple; petals 12–20 mm long, lavender with dark veins to dark purple; mature fruits 6–10 cm
long, to 2 mm wide. Open woods and roadsides, loose sand; w part of Blackland Prairie and
West Cross Timbers (Comanche and Young cos.) (Mahler 1988); e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards
Plateau. May–Jun, sporadically to Aug.
480   BUDDLEJACEAE/CABOMBACEAE

                        THLASPI PENNYCRESS, FRENCHWEED
AA genus of 60 species of n temperate areas and n hemisphere mountains; some European
and Asian species accumulate metals (nickel and zinc). (Greek: thlaein, to crush, from the flat-
tened silicle)
REFERENCE: Payson 1926.

Thlaspi arvense L., (pertaining to cultivated fields), FIELD PENNYCRESS, MITHRIDATE-MUSTARD,
FRENCHWEED, FANWEED, PENNYCRESS. Glabrous annual to 50 cm tall; leaves (except lowest)
sessile and clasping, oblong to triangular-lanceolate, entire or toothed; petals white, 2–5 mm
long; fruits conspicuous, flat, orbicular, 8–15 mm wide, notched at apex. Railroads and road-
sides, various soils; Denton, Grayson, Henderson, and Tarrant cos.; nc TX s to Edwards Plateau.
Mar–early May. Native of Europe. Formerly used medicinally (Mabberley 1997); reported to
have caused poisoning and death of cattle when fed in large amounts in hay; photosensitization
has also been reported (Mulligan & Munro 1990). 9 I


                   BUDDLEJACEAE BUDDLEJA FAMILY
AA small (120 species in 8 genera), tropical and warm area, especially e Asian family of trees,
shrubs, or rarely herbs with most species in the ornamentally important genus Buddleja. Fam-
ily name from Buddleja, BUTTERFLY-BUSH, a genus of ca. 100 species of warm areas, especially e
Asia; some are used medicinally or as fish poisons. Buddleja davidii Franch., a Chinese species
widely cultivated in Europe and milder climate regions of the United States, is extremely at-
tractive to butterflies. (Named for Reverend Adam Buddle, 1660–1715, amateur botanist) (sub-
class Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is a small bushy-branched herb with
pposite linear leaves and small, 4-merous, white flowers.
REFERENCES: Moore 1947; Rogers 1986; Jensen 1992.

                                POLYPREMUM POLLYPRIM
AA monotypic genus of warm areas of the Americas; previously treated in the Loganiaceae.
(Name altered from the Greek: polypremnos, many-stemmed)

Polypremum procumbens L., (procumbent, prostrate), JUNIPER-LEAF, POLLYPRIM. Bushy-branched,
reclining to erect herb to 30 cm high; perennial but flowering as an annual; leaves opposite, nar-
rowly linear, to 3 cm long, rarely > 2 mm wide; flowers solitary or in a terminal leafy cyme, 4-
merous; corollas white, almost rotate, 1.8–2.3 mm long, divided 1/3 their length; capsules ovoid,
notched at apex, ca. 1.5–2.5 mm long. Sandy woods, old fields, and disturbed ground; se and e TX
w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau, also Trans-Pecos. Jun–Oct.


               CABOMBACEAE WATER-SHIELD FAMILY
Aquatic, rhizomatous, perennial herbs rooting in mud; vegetative tissues with conspicuous air
chambers; flowers axillary, solitary, on thick peduncles; sepals and petals each usually 3(–4);
stamens 3–36; pistils (1–)2–18, simple; ovaries superior; fruits indehiscent.

AA very small (6 species in 2 genera—Wiersema 1997c) pantropical and warm temperate fam-
ily of aquatics. It has often been lumped with the Nymphaeaceae, but differs in having free car-
pels. Cabomba has flower parts in 3s like those of monocotyledons. Some taxonomists refer to
the Cabombaceae as “paleoherbs” (a group including Aristolochiales, Piperales, and
Nymphaeales) and believe them to be an early branch off the evolutionary line leading to
monocots; this view is supported by characters such as the 3-merous flowers and molecular
data which place the paleoherbs as the immediate sister group of the monocots (Chase et al.
                                                           ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        481




Rorippa sessiliflora [GR1]     Rorippa teres [GWO]                             Sibara virginica [STE]




     Sinapis alba [SMI]         Sinapis arvensis [REE]                    Sisymbrium altissimum [REE]




   Sisymbrium irio [GLE]     Sisymbrium officinale [ROB]                Streptanthus hyacinthoides [GR1]
482   CACTACEAE

1993) (see Fig. 41 in Appendix 6). In the past Brasenia and Cabomba were often included in the
Nymphaeaceae (e.g., Correll & Johnston 1970). (subclass Magnoliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: aquatics with peltate floating leaves and either with con-
spicuous mucilage on underwater surfaces or with much dissected submerged leaves; perianth
usually 3-merous; carpels free.
REFERENCES: Wood 1959; Williamson & Schneider 1993a; Wiersema 1997c.

1. Plants with only undivided, alternate, peltate, floating leaves, the blades 13.5–11(–13.5) cm long;
   lower surfaces of leaf blades and petioles coated with a heavy, very conspicuous layer of jelly-
   like mucilage; stamens 18–38(–51); perianth purplish, 10–20 mm long                                      Brasenia
1. Plants with much dissected, opposite (rarely whorled), submerged leaves and also usually small
   (blades ca. 1–3 cm long), alternate, peltate, floating leaves; lower surfaces of leaf blades and peti-
   oles without conspicuous mucilage layer, the tissues only barely mucilaginous; stamens 3–6;
   perianth usually whitish (rarely purplish or yellowish), 4–12 mm long                                    Cabomba

                       BRASENIA PURPLE WEN-DOCK, WATER-SHIELD
AA monotypic genus of America, Africa, India, temperate e Asia, and Australia. Submerged
parts are conspicuously covered with mucilaginous jelly. (Named for Christopher Brasen, 1734–
1774, Moravian missionary and plant collector in Greenland and Labrador—Wiersema 1997c)
REFERENCE: Osborn & Schneider 1988.

Brasenia schreberi J.F. Gmel., (for Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber, 1739–1810, German
botanist), PURPLE WEN-DOCK, WATER-SHIELD, SCHREBER’S WATERSHED. Rooted aquatic; jelly-like
mucilage layer thick and obvious; leaves long-petiolate; leaf blades elliptic to broadly oval, 3.5–
11(–13.5) cm long, 2–6.5 cm wide, centrally peltate, entire or slightly crenate; flowers on pe-
duncles to 15 cm long, emergent when open; perianth 12–20 mm long, the petals slightly longer
and narrower than the sepals; petals without proximal auricles; pistils 2–18; fruits 5–10 mm
long, with 1–2 seeds. Ponds, lakes, slow streams; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage (Carr 1994);
mainly e TX. May–Jul. [B. peltata Pursh] Cultivated as an ornamental and the young leaves are
eaten in Japan (Mabberley 1987). Reported to be wind-pollinated (Wiersema 1997c).
Williamson and Schneider (1993b) gave an uncited reference indicating that Brasenia has phy-
totoxic properties which contribute to its dominance in some situations; it is possibly useful as
an allelopathic way of controlling aquatic weeds.

                                            CABOMBA FANWORT
AA genus of 5 species (Wiersema 1997c) of mostly tropical to warm areas of the Americas.
(Probably an aboriginal name, possibly from Guiana)
REFERENCES: Fassett 1953; Ørgaard 1991.

Cabomba caroliniana A. Gray, (of Carolina), CAROLINA FANWORT, FANWORT. Rooted aquatic;
stems to 2 m or more long; submersed leaves opposite or rarely whorled, the blades palmately 2–3
times dissected into linear-filiform segments; floating leaves alternate, few, the blades peltate,
entire, linear-elliptic, 1–3 cm long; flowers solitary on axillary peduncles; perianth 4–12 mm
long; sepals 3; petals 3; sepals and petals similarly colored; petals proximally with yellow, nec-
tar-bearing auricles; pistils (1–)2–4; fruits 1–3–seeded, 4–7 mm long. Ponds, lakes, quiet streams;
included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e
TX, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jul. Cabomba is sometimes used in aquaria (Mabberley 1987).

                              CACTACEAE CACTUS FAMILY
Fleshy or soft-woody, succulent, green-stemmed, usually armed shrubs to small trees; leaves in
ours absent, or present as fleshy points on new growth; specialized, axillary, cushion-like bud
                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       483




 Thlaspi arvense [REE]                                Polypremum procumbens [EN2, GLE]




Brasenia schreberi [CO1]                 Cabomba caroliniana [IPL]                 Coryphantha echinus [EMO ]




             Coryphantha sulcata [HEA]                               Echinocactus texensis [LUN]
484   CACTACEAE

areas (= areoles) usually bearing spines and sometimes barbed hairs or bristles (= glochids);
flowers solitary or crowded, sessile, closed at night, often showy; sepal-like perianth parts 5 or
more, grading into the many, thin-textured petal-like structures, all joined at base to form a cup
or tube (= hypanthium) on summit of the thick, pedicel-like, inferior ovary; stamens many;
fruit a dry or fleshy berry.

AA medium-large (1,400 species in 97 genera) family of stem-succulent xerophytes native al-
most exclusively to the New World, but now widely naturalized; some have become problem-
atic invaders (e.g., Opuntia in Australia); the family includes a number of epiphytes. Xero-
phytic adaptations include a thick cuticle, large volume to surface ratio, widespread shallow
root system (to take in any available rain), crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM photosynthe-
sis—allows night absorption and storage of CO2 thereby reducing water loss through transpira-
tion during the day—Crosswhite 1984), and spines (condense dew and protect from herbivores).
Numerous species are utilized as ornamentals and some are endangered due to overcollecting
(e.g., “cactus rustling”); cacti are protected by the Convention of International Trade in Endan-
gered Species (CITES) (Barthlott & Hunt 1993). Many species have alkaloids (e.g., Lophophora
williamsii (Lem. ex Salm-Dyck) J.M. Coult.—PEYOTE, which contains the hallucinogen, mesca-
line, and is used in religious ceremonies by Native Americans).

Because of their extreme morphological specializations, the taxonomic placement of the
Cactaceae has been problematic; however, biochemical and molecular markers indicate a rela-
tionship with the Caryophyllidae (e.g., Cactaceae are characterized by betalain pigments like
most other members of this subclass—Cronquist and Thorne 1994). A study by Downie and
Palmer (1994) suggested the family may be derived from Portulacaceae. On the basis of molecu-
lar data, Hershkovitz and Zimmer (1997) also indicated that the family is derived from within
the Portulacaceae and that the molecular divergence “between pereskioid cacti and the genus
Talinum (Portulacaceae) is less than that between many Portulacaceae genera.” The ancestral
condition within the family is clearly observable in the small subfamily Pereskioideae com-
posed of leafy shrubs and trees with only slightly succulent stems. Family name conserved
from Cactus, a generic name rejected in favor of Mammillaria (Farr et al. 1979). (Greek: cactus, a
spiny or prickly plant) (subclass Caryophyllidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: leafless stem succulents with watery sap, areoles (= pad-like
axillary buds unique to the family) typically bearing spines, and flowers showy, with numer-
ous perianth parts and numerous stamens.
REFERENCES: Britton & Rose 1919–1923, 1937, 1963; Schulz & Runyon 1930; Marshall & Bock
1941; Benson 1969, 1982; Weniger 1970, 1984; Grant & Grant 1979a; Barthlott & Hunt 1993;
Behkne & Mabry 1994; Hershkovitz & Zimmer 1997.

1. Stems jointed, cylindrical OR flattened; glochids (= small barbed hairs) present at areoles              Opuntia
1. Stems not jointed, variously shaped but never flattened; glochids absent.
   2. Stems vertically ribbed.
      3. Central spine (of an areole) strongly hooked at end, 12–38 mm long; flowers yellow with
         red basally                                                                                    Thelocactus
      3. Central spine absent OR present, if present curved downward, not hooked; flowers vari-
         ously red, red and yellow, pink to light purple, OR reddish basally and then orange and pink
         to white apically.
         4. Spines, if present, not cross-ribbed; ovaries with slender spines; filaments white, green,
            yellow, or pink; stems usually multiple, cylindric, 10 cm or less in diam.                 Echinocereus
         4. Spines stout, cross-ribbed (= annulate); ovaries spineless; filaments red; stems usually
            single, hemispheric, to 30 cm in diam.                                                     Echinocactus
   2. Stems tuberculate (= with nipple-like protrusions), not ribbed.
      5. Flowers variously colored, located on new growth near the stem apex at the base of the
                                                                                       CORYPHANTHA/CACTACEAE    485

        upper side of a tubercle; above ground portion of plant not flat, the small stems
        hemispheroidal to globose, ovoid, obovoid, or cylindroid; stems sometimes solitary but of-
        ten forming clumps; tubercles usually with a longitudinal groove on the upper side.
        6. Fruits green at maturity; seeds brown; central spines present and differentiated from ra-
           dials; flowers yellow to yellow with pink basally to dark purplish pink.
           7. Flowers dark purplish pink; sepal-like structures fringed with long hairs (= fimbriate);
              seeds reticulate; radial spines 12–40; central spines 3–10 per areole, the lower central
              spine shorter than the upward-directed other central spines or absent                         Escobaria
           7. Flowers yellow or yellow with pink basally; sepal-like structrures not fimbriate; seeds
              smooth and shining, sometimes minutely punctate; radial spines 6–26; central spines
              1–4 per areole, the lower central spine longer than the upward-directed other central
              spines                                                                                     Coryphantha
        6. Fruits red at maturity; seeds black; central spines usually none (sometimes 1(–2), if present
           not differentiated from radials); flowers greenish to yellowish (rarely bronzish)                Escobaria
     5. Flowers pink, white, cream, or some mixture, located on old growth of preceding seasons
        below the stem apex, between the tubercles and not obviously connected with them; above
        ground portion of plant ± flat or slightly convex; stems usually solitary, sometimes clus-
        tered; tubercles without a longitudinal groove on the upper side                                  Mammillaria


                                               CORYPHANTHA
Stems solitary or branching basally and forming mounds; ribs none; with spirally arranged tu-
bercles; areoles apical on the tubercles; flowers and fruits produced at base of upper side of tu-
bercles, connected to the areole by a groove on the tubercle; flowers ca. 50–62 mm in diam.;
fruits fleshy, green at maturity, smooth, ellipsoid; seeds 1–2 mm in greatest diam., brown,
smooth and shiny, sometimes minutely punctate.

AA genus of 45 species of sw North America; some are cultivated as ornamentals. While some
authors (e.g., Benson 1982; Jones et al. 1997) include the morphologically similar genus
Escobaria in Coryphantha, we are following Hunt (1978), Kartesz (1994), and J. Kartesz (pers.
comm. 1997) in recognizing Escobaria as a distinct genus (see Escobaria for additional informa-
tion). Castetter et al. (1975) gave characters separating the genera. (Greek: corypha, top, and
anthus, flower, from the position of the flowers at the apex of the stem)
REFERENCES: Craig 1945; Castetter et al. 1975.

1. Petal-like structures yellow; radial spines 16–26; seeds minutely punctate                            C. echinus
1. Petal-like structures yellow, pink basally; radial spines 6–8; seeds not punctate                     C. sulcata

Coryphantha echinus (Engelm.) Britton & Rose, (prickly), RHINOCEROS CACTUS. Spines brown,
usually down-curved; central spines 3 or 4, ca. 12–17 mm long; radial spines 16–26, to 28 mm
long on upper side of areole, 12 mm long on lower; flowers yellow; fruits green, ca. 2.5 cm long.
Limestone soils; Cooke Co., (Benson 1982); mainly Trans-Pecos. Jun–Jul. [C. cornifera (DC.) Lem.
var. echinus (Engelm.) L.D. Benson, Mammillaria echinus Engelm.] We are following Jones et al.
(1997) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) for nomenclature of this species.

Coryphantha sulcata (Engelm.) Britton & Rose, (sulcate, furrowed), PINEAPPLE CACTUS, FINGER
CACTUS. Spines at first yellow and pink or pink, later overlain by gray or white; central spines 1–
3 per areole, spreading, curving, the longer 9–12 mm long; radial spines 6–8 per areole; petal-like
structures yellow apically, pink basally; fruits green, to 3 cm long, fleshy at maturity; seeds
brown, smooth and shining. Prairies, sandy or gravelly soils; Denton and Tarrant cos., also
Brown, Comanche (HPC), Mills, and Lampasas (Benson 1982) cos.; nc TX s to sc TX. May–Jun.
[Mammilaria sulcata Engelm.] m/85
486   CACTACEAE/ECHINOCACTUS

                               ECHINOCACTUS BARREL CACTUS
AA genus of 6 species of ribbed cacti often with long spines native to sw North America;
some are cultivated as ornamentals. While now treated as a small genus, Echinocactusformerly
included most cacti with ribbed stems (Barthlott & Hunt 1993). (Greek: echinos, hedgehog, and
cactus, name for another spiny plant)
REFERENCE: Maddox 1986.

Echinocactus texensis Hopffer, (of Texas), HORSECRIPPLER, DEVIL’S-HEAD CACTUS, DEVIL’S-PINCUSH-
ION, MANCA CABALLO. Stems solitary, green, hemispheroidal, 12.5–20 cm long, up to 30 cm in
diam.; ribs 13–17; spines stout, cross-ribbed; central spine 1 per areole, curved downward; radial
spines 5–7 per areole; petal-like structures basally reddish, then orange and pink to white
apically, with midribs purplish to violet; filaments red; anthers yellow; fruits red, fleshy becom-
ing dry, splitting irregularly with deciduous scales. Sandy or limestone soils; Coryell, Tarrant,
Williamson, and Young cos. (Benson 1982); nc TX s and w to s TX and Trans-Pecos. Apr–May
[Homalocephala texensis (Hopffer) Britton & Rose] Grazing animals can be badly injured by
the strong spines and older plants are reported capable of puncturing pickup tires; as a result
this species has been eliminated from many areas (Wills & Irwin 1961; Kirkpatrick 1992). m/88

                             ECHINOCEREUS HEDGEHOG CACTUS
Stems branching near ground level, cylindroid, with 5–18 ribs; spines smooth (not cross-
ribbed); fruits on old growth of preceding year above areoles; fruits fleshy at maturity, bearing
slender spines.

AA genus of 47 species of sw North America; all are cultivated. (Greek: echinos, hedgehog, and
genus Cereus from Latin: cereus, a wax taper or candle)
REFERENCES: Taylor 1985; Miller 1988; Ferguson 1989.

1. Flowers red or red and yellow (no blue mixture); stems usually 6.2–10 cm in diam.; ribs 5–7(–12);
   radial spines 4–6                                                                                    E. coccineus
1. Flowers pink to light purple; stems 2.5–5 cm in diam.; ribs 12–18; radial spines 22–32          E. reichenbachii

Echinocereus coccineus Engelm. var. paucispinus (Engelm.) D.J. Ferguson, (sp.: scarlet; var.: few
spined), CLARET-CUP CACTUS, RED-FLOWER HEDGEHOG. Stems few, 15–20 cm long; central spines
absent; radial spines nearly straight, gray, 3–3.8 cm long; flowers 25–38 mm long; fruits red.
Rocky limestone soils; Lampasas (Benson 1982), Burnet, and Williamson (Ferguson 1989) cos.;
sw part of nc TX w and sw to Trans-Pecos. Mid-Mar–Jul. [E. triglochidiatus Engelm. var.
paucispinus (Engelm.) W.T. Marsh.] m/88

Echinocereus reichenbachii (Terscheck ex Walp.) F. Haage, (for Heinrich Gottlieb Ludwig
Reichenbach, 1793–1979, German naturalist), LACE CACTUS, WHITE LACE CACTUS, BROWN LACE
CACTUS, HEDGEHOG CACTUS. Stems solitary or branching, 7.5–15(–22.5) cm long; areoles narrow,
3 mm long; spines obscuring the stem, central spines usually absent (rarely 1–3), if present,
much smaller than the radials; radial spines arched, 4.5–6 mm long, straw-colored to pale gray,
distally pink to reddish; flowers 20–60 cm long; fruits green with conspicuous, deciduous,
woolly hairs from the areoles. Gravelly, rocky, or sandy soils, especially limestone; Hood,
Johnson, Palo Pinto, and Williamson cos., also Brown (HPC), Burnet, Jack, McLennan, Parker,
Young (Benson 1982), and Tarrant (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; nc TX s to Edwards Plateau and
w to Panhandle. May–Jun. m/88

                                    ESCOBARIA NIPPLE CACTUS
Stems solitary or branching basally and forming mounds; ribs none; with spirally arranged tu-
bercles; areoles apical on the tubercles; flowers and fruits produced at base of upper side of tu-
                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS            487




                                                           Escobaria missouriensis var. similis [BB2]




Echinocereus coccineus var. paucispinus [TAN]




                                                            Escobaria vivipara var. radiosa [EMO]




       Echinocereus reichenbachii [BEL, GAR]
488   CACTACEAE/ESCOBARIA

bercles, connected to the areole by a groove on the tubercle; flowers 25-56 mm in diam.; fruits
fleshy, red or green at maturity, smooth, globose to ellipsoid; seeds 1–2 mm in greatest diam.,
brown or black, punctate or reticulate.

AA genus of 15 species of sw North America to s Canada and Cuba. This genus is morphologi-
cally similar to Coryphantha and has often been lumped with it (e.g., Benson 1982; Jones et al.
1997). Hunt (1978), however, believed “… that Escobaria (with Neobesseya) represent an evolu-
tionary lineage independent of Coryphantha, that is to say that they are distinct phyletic
groups at an approximately analogous stage.” We are with some hesitation following Hunt
(1978), Kartesz (1994), and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in recognizing Escobaria. The following
dichotomy separating the two genera by Barthlott & Hunt (1993) raises questions about their
distinctiveness:
1. Seedcoat cells tabular; outer tepals entire, or areoles with glands                                     Coryphantha
1. Seedcoat cells tabular-concave or par-concave (pitted); outer tepals fringed; areolar glands
   absent                                                                                                     Escobaria
Because of the difficulty of separating the two using the above dichotomy, other characters are
used in our key to genera with Escobaria coming out in two places. Castetter et al. (1975) dis-
cussed characters separating the genera. (Named for the Escobar brothers, Romulo and Numa,
Mexicans of the early 20th century)
REFERENCES: Britton & Rose 1919–1923, 1937, 1963; Craig 1945; Castetter et al. 1975; Hunt 1978;
Taylor 1978; Fischer 1980.

1. Flowers greenish to yellowish (rarely bronzish); fruits red at maturity; seeds black; central spines
   usually none (sometimes 1(–2), if present not differentiated from radials);                         E. missouriensis
1. Flowers dark purplish pink; fruits green at maturity; seeds brown; central spines 3–4 per areole,
   differentiated from radials                                                                               E. viviparaa

Escobaria missouriensis (Sweet) D.R. Hunt, (of Missouri), PLAINS NIPPLE CACTUS. Spines yellow-
ish becoming dark gray, pubescent; central spines usually none, if present, undifferentiated
from radial spines; radial spines 12–15 per areole, 10–20 mm long; fruits red, 10–20 mm long;
seeds black, punctate. Spring–?

1. Flowers ca. 4.4–5 cm in diam. and length; sepal-like structures not fimbriate; fruits ca. 1 cm in
   diam., globose; petal-like structures abruptly long acuminate                                          var. robustior
1. Flowers ca. 5–6.2 cm in diam. and length; outer sepal-like structures fimbriate; fruits 1.5–2 cm
   long, globular to ellipsoid; petal-like structures acuminate-attenuate                                    var. similis

var. robustior (Engelm.) D.R. Hunt, (robust, stout). Fruits globose, ca. 1 cm in diam. Grasslands;
Denton, Williamson, and Young cos. (Benson 1982); also Hale Co. in Panhandle and Bexar Co. in
c TX (Benson 1982). [Coryphantha missouriensis (Sweet) Britt. & Rose var. robustior (Engelm.)
L.D. Benson] While some authors have put Escobaria missouriensis var. robustior into syn-
onymy under Coryphantha sulcata (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997), the individuals in nc
TX traditionally placed in var. robustior (e.g., Benson 1982; Mahler 1988) seem much closer to
Escobaria missouriensis var. similis than to C. sulcata; J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) agrees that
var. robustoir should be treated as a var. of Escobaria missouriensis.

var. similis (Engelm.) N.P. Taylor, (similar). Fruits globose to ellipsoid, 1.5–2 cm long. Grasslands;
Grayson Co., also Dallas, Kaufman, Lampasas, and Tarrant cos. (Benson 1982); nc TX to c TX
(Bexar Co.) and w to Wichita Co. in Rolling Plains. [Coryphantha missouriensis (Sweet) Britton
& Rose var. caespitosa (Engelm.) L.D. Benson, Escobaria missouriensis var. caespitosa (Engelm.)
D.R. Hunt, Mammilaria similis Engelm.] m/89

Escobaria vivipara (Nutt.) Buxb. var. radiosa (Engelm.) D.R. Hunt, (sp.: producing live young,
freely producing asexual propagating parts; var.: with many rays), SPINY-STAR, PINCUSHION
                                                                       MAMMILLARIA /CACTACEAE    489

CACTUS, BEEHIVE NIPPLE CACTUS . Spines relatively dense, obscuring stems to varying degrees;
central spines usually white basally but tipped with pink, red, or black, 3–4 per areole, 1.5–2.2
cm long, straight; radial spines white to pink, 20–40 per areole, 1.2–1.9 cm long; fruits green, 1.9–
2.5 cm long; seeds brown, reticulate. Grasslands and woodlands, limestone soils; Hood and Wise
cos., also Brown, Hamilton (HPC), Montague (S. Lusk, pers. comm.), and Young (Benson 1982)
cos.; mainly w 1/2 of TX. May–Jun. [Coryphantha vivipara (Nutt.) Britton & Rose. var. radiosa
(Engelm.) Backeberg, Mammilaria vivipara (Nutt.) Haw. var. radiosa Engelm.] m/90

 MAMMILLARIA FISHHOOK CACTUS, PINCUSHION CACTUS, NIPPLE CACTUS
AA genus of ca. 150 species ranging from the sw U.S. to Colombia and Venezuela, but espe-
cially in Mexico; they are low, often tuft-forming and a number are cultivated as ornamentals.
(Latin: mamilla, nipple, in reference to the shape of the tubercles)
REFERENCES: Craig 1945; Hunt 1971.

Mammillaria heyderi Muehlenpf., (for Herr Heyder, 1808–1884, a noted cultivator of cacti in
Berlin), FLATTENED MAMMILLARIA, NIPPLE CACTUS, LITTLE-CHILIS, BIZNAGA DE CHILITOS. Plant low-
growing spiny pincushion; sap milky; stems typically solitary to rarely clustered, turbinate to
subglobose, but the above ground portion ± flat to shallowly convex, 7.5–10(–15) cm in diam.;
tubercles prominent, ± conical from a subpyramidal base, 9–12 mm long; areoles apical on the
tubercles; spines dense but not obscuring the stem; central spines 0–2(–4) per areole, the longer
ones 3–9 mm long, straight; radial spines 6–22 per areole, the longer ones 6–16 mm long; flowers
pink, white, cream, or some mixture, not connected by a groove to the areoles; fruits red, 12–40
mm long, 6–9 mm broad. Limestone soils in grasslands or dry areas, typically in partial shade;
Brown Co. (Stanford 1971); also San Saba Co. just sw of nc TX; w margin of nc TX s to s TX and
w to Trans-Pecos. May–Jun. [M. gummifera Engelm. var. applanata (Engelm.) L.D. Benson, M.
heyderi var. applanata Engelm.] The fruits are reported to be edible (Kirkpatrick 1992). m/97

                            OPUNTIA PRICKLY-PEAR, CHOLLA
Mat- or clump-forming perennials to shrubs or small trees; stems jointed, either cylindrical or
flattened; areoles usually with spines and small, brown, retrorsely barbed hairs (= glochids);
young stems with a small, single, fleshy, vestigial, early deciduous leaf below each areole; fruits
dry or fleshy, sometimes sweet and edible.

AA genus of ca. 200 species native from Massachusetts and British Columbia s to Straits of
Magellan and the Galápagos Islands; stems are either flattened or cylindrical (the latter known
as CHOLLAS); some are tree-like; a number have edible fruits ( PRICKLY-PEARS); the flattened stems
of others are eaten as a vegetable; some serve as hosts for the cochineal insect (Dactylopius coc-
cus), the source of a red dye; alkaloids, including mescaline, can be present. In some parts of TX
during periods of drought, flame-throwers are used to burn the spines off Opuntia species so
they can be used as an emergency food for livestock. Some species of Opuntia have been intro-
duced into the Old World and have become problematic invaders in certain areas (e.g., Austra-
lia). A number of other Opuntia species including O. stricta (Haw.) Haw. var. stricta (SPINELESS
PRICKLY-PEAR), a spineless ornamental 0.6–2 m tall, and Opuntia imbricata (TREE CHOLLA), a
large (1–3 m tall) cylindrical species, are cultivated in nc TX and long persist. 9 In addition to the
obvious spines, glochids (= minute barbed hairs or bristles) are also present and can cause der-
matitis; they can be extremely irritating; gloves should be worn when handling the plants (Spoerke
& Smolinske 1990). The PRICKLEY-PEAR was designated the state plant of Texas by the 74th state
legislature; all members of subgenus Opuntia (with flat stems) are considered the state plant,
while those of subgenus Cylindroopuntia (with cylindrical stems) are not (Jones et al. 1997).
(Greek name for a spiny plant (not Cactaceae) that grew near Greek town of Opus (Opuntis)
490    CACTACEAE/OPUNTIA

REFERENCES: Grant & Grant 1979b, 1979c, 1982a, 1982b; Grant & Hurd 1979; Grant et al. 1979;
Leuenberger 1991, 1993.

1. Joints (= stem segments or sections) cylindrical (CHOLLAS ) (Subgenus Cylindroopuntia).
   2. Plants to only 10 cm tall, mat-like or clump-like; spines with epidermis separating into a sheath
      only at apex (sheath short), 6–12(–15) per areole; flowers yellow; joints narrowed gradually
      toward their base, noticeably broader apically                                                             O. schottii
   2. Plants to several meters tall, usually shrubby; spines with entire epidermis separating into a
      thin paper-like sheath (sheath as long as spine), 1–10 per areole; flower color various includ-
      ing yellow; joints ± equal in diam. throughout their length except where attached.
      3. Plants golden-tan from sheath color; spines 6–10 per areole, reddish brown; flowers usually
         green (centers yellowish and the apices and exteriors often tinged with red or brown); ter-
         minal joints 9–12 mm in diam.                                                                          O. tunicata
      3. Plants not golden-tan; spines 1–4 per areole, gray or grayish pink; flowers yellow, green,
         bronze, lavender, purple, or reddish; terminal joints 3–10 mm in diam.
         4. Flowers green, yellow, or bronze; terminal joints 3–4.5 mm in diam.; fruits not tuberculate
                                                                                                              O. leptocaulis
         4. Flowers lavender, purple, or reddish; terminal joints 5–10 mm in diam.; fruits strongly tu-
            berculate (= with conspicuous raised areas)                                                           O. kleiniae
1. Joints flattened (PRICKLY-PEARS) (Subgenus Opuntia).
   5. Plants trees 3–5(–7) m tall with a main trunk 0.6–1.2 m tall (but plants can be very dense and
      ± as wide as tall); larger terminal joints (22.5–)30–60 cm long; fruits 5–10 cm long; escaped
      cultivar in sw part of nc TX                                                                           O. ficus-indicaa
   5. Plants prostrate to sprawling or suberect shrubs 7.5 cm to 3(–3.5) m tall, a main trunk if present
      very short; larger terminal joints 3.8–34(–40) cm long (except 45–90(–120) cm long in the
      locally rare cultivar, O. engelmannii var. linguiformis); fruits 2.1–7 cm long; native nc TX taxa
      (except var. linguiformis) widespread in the area.
      6. Spines usually needle-like, not flattened, elliptic to circular in cross-section; plants prostrate,
         most or all of the flattened joints on the ground; spines usually present only on the upper-
         most part of the joints or absent.
         7. Spines 0–1 per areole, 1.9–3 cm long, 0.5–0.7 mm in diam.; spines gray or brownish; all
            roots fibrous; joints green; seed margins smooth and regular, ca. 0.5 mm broad                       O. humifusa
         7. Spines 1–6 per areole, usually 3.8–5.6 cm long, 0.25–0.5 mm in diam.; spines white or pale
            gray; main roots tuberous; joints glaucous; seed margins irregular, ca. 1 mm broad                O. macrorhiza
      6. Spines, at least some larger ones, flattened basally, narrowly elliptic in cross-section;
         plants suberect to sprawling shrubs to nearly prostrate, many of the joints often separated
         by 1 or more others from the ground; spines often present on at least the upper half of the
         joints.
         8. Spines cream to yellow; joints green; petal-like structures yellow                               O. engelmannii
         8. Spines not all cream to yellow, usually dark brown; joints bluish green; petal-like struc-
            tures yellow or yellow with red bases                                                           O. phaeacantha

Opuntia engelmannii Salm-Dyck, (for George Engelmann, 1809–1884, German-born botanist
and physician of St. Louis). Large, suberect to sprawling shrub 1–3(–3.5) m high; joints green;
spines cream to yellow, (1–)3–6 per areole, usually on all but lower areoles, 1.2–4(–5) cm long,
erect; flowers yellow; fruits purple, 2.1–7 cm long. May–Jun.

1. Larger terminal joints usually obovate to orbicular, 15–25(–30) cm long                                 var. lindheimeri
1. Larger terminal joints elongate, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate, 45–90(–120) cm long                  var. linguiformis

var. lindheimeri (Engelm.) B.D. Parfitt & Pinkava, (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879,
German-born TX collector), TEXAS PRICKLY-PEAR, NOPAL PRICKLY-PEAR. Sandy, gravelly, or alluvial
                                                                           OPUNTIA/CACTACEAE    491

soils; grasslands; Mills Co., also Bell, Coryell, Ellis, Lampasas, and Navarro cos. (Benson 1982); c
Blackland Prairie s to s TX and w to Trans-Pecos (also Arbuckle Mountains in OK). [Opuntia lind-
heimeri Engelm.] According to Crosswhite (1980), during pioneer days the fruits were eaten fresh,
made into preserves or syrup, or boiled and fermented into “colonche”; the young pads were also
eaten; however, eating excessive amounts of older pads can cause oxalic acid poisoning. 9 m/101

var. linguiformis (Griffiths) B.D. Parfitt & Pinkava, (tongue-shaped), COW’S-TONGUE, COW-
TONGUE PRICKLY-PEAR, LENGUA DE VACA. Cultivated as an ornamental because of the tongue-like
joints, escapes; Brown (Stanford 1971) and Comanche (HPC) cos.; also e Edwards Plateau and s
TX. [O. lindheimeri var. linguiformis (Griffiths) L.D. Benson] According to Benson (1982), “… this
cultivated and escaped variety is known only from plants descended from those collected near
San Antonio, Texas, by Griffiths in 1906.”

var. engelmannii, ENGELMANN’S PRICKLY-PEAR, native to the s and w of nc TX, is distinguished by
the often chalky white or pale straw-colored spines. It is used in Mexico as a source of
nopalitos—the tender young green pads, which have not yet formed spines, are cut into strips;
they are boiled several times and used as a food (Kirkpatrick 1992); nopalitos can sometimes be
found fresh or canned in TX supermarkets. The ripe fruits are known as tunas; in order to pre-
serve them, Native Americans squeezed the juice out and dried them in the sun (Kirkpatrick
1992); a candy-like jelly known as queso de tuna is made from the fruits in Mexico. [O.
phaecantha Engelm. var. discata (Griffiths) L.D. Benson & Walk.]

Opuntia ficus-indica (L.) Mill., (Indian fig), INDIAN-FIG. Tree 3–5(–7) m tall with a main trunk
0.6–1.2 m tall; larger terminal joints green, broadly to narrowly obovate or oblong; spines none
to abundant, 1–6 per node, flattened basally, the longer ones 1.2–2.5(–4) cm long; flowers yellow
or orange-yellow, externally pink-tinged; fruits yellow, orange, red, or purplish, edible at matu-
rity. Cutivated and escapes; Lampasas Co. (Benson 1982), also Brown Co. (Stanford 1971); scat-
tered in s and w TX. Probably native of Mexico. Spineless forms have been valued for their fruits
since prehistoric times and were probably spread by trading; this species has become natural-
ized in many parts of the world and is a pest in some areas (Benson 1982). I

Opuntia humifusa (Raf.) Raf., (spreading on the ground), EASTERN PRICKLY-PEAR. Low clump- or
mat-forming perennial 7.5–10 cm high; joints green or reddish purple in winter, 3.8–10 cm long,
elliptic, orbicular, or obovate, often noticeably wrinkled; spineless or spines 1 per areole in the
upper areoles; spines 25–38 mm long; flowers yellow; fruits purple or red, 2.5–3.8 cm long; seeds
4.5 mm in diam., 1.5 mm thick. Open dry areas; Denton, Grayson, Henderson, Kaufman, and
Limestone cos., also Brown (HPC), Dallas, and Tarrant (Benson 1982) cos.; se and e TX w to nc
TX and e Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun. [O. compressa(Salisb.) J.F. Macbr.]

Opuntia kleiniae DC., (resembling Kleinia in the Asteraceae), KLEIN’S CHOLLA, CANDLE CHOLLA,
TASAJILLO. Bush or shrub to 2 m tall; larger terminal joints 10–30 cm long, 0.5–1 cm in diam.;
tubercules prominent; spines 1–4 per areole; flowers lavender to purple or reddish; fruits red to
green and red, to 2 cm long. Rocky soils of hillsides, deserts, and grasslands; Eastland and
Lampasas cos. (Benson 1982); sw edge of nc TX s and w to Trans-Pecos. May.

Opuntia leptocaulis DC., (thin-scaled), DESERT CHRISTMAS CACTUS, PENCIL CACTUS, PENCIL
CHOLLA, CHRISTMAS CHOLLA, TASAJILLO, TESAJO, RAT-TAIL CACTUS, SLENDER-STEM CACTUS. Bush or
erect shrub 50–70 cm tall; joints 30–40 cm long; terminal joints usually 2.5–7.5 cm long, 3–4.5
mm in diam.; tubercules almost absent; spines 1 per areole, 2.5–5 cm long; flowers green, yellow,
or bronze; fruits bright red, ca. 12 mm long. Clay or alluvial soils; Archer, Bell, Brown, Coleman,
Milam, Palo Pinto, and Parker cos., also Clay, Hood, Johnson, and McLennan cos. (Benson 1982);
Blackland Prairie w through w 2/3 of TX. Apr–May.
492   CACTACEAE/THELOCACTUS

Opuntia macrorhiza Engelm., (large-rooted), PLAINS PRICKLY-PEAR, GRASSLAND PRICKLY-PEAR,
CHAIN PRICKLY-PEAR, TUBEROUS-ROOT PRICKLY-PEAR. Low, clump-forming perennial 7.5–12.5 cm
high; joints glaucous, bluish green, 5–10 cm long, orbicular to obovate; spines 1–6 per areole,
mostly in upper areoles, the longer spines 3.8–5.6 cm long, slender; flowers yellow, usually with
base red-tinged; fruits reddish purple, 25–38 mm long; seeds 4.5 mm in diam., 1.25–2.25 mm
thick. Sandy or rocky soils; nearly throughout TX, less so in Edwards Plateau and e Texas. May–Jun.
Opuntia phaeacantha Engelm., (dark-thorned), PRICKLY-PEAR, ENGLEMANN ’S PRICKLY-PEAR,
PURPLE-FRUIT PRICKLY-PEAR. Large, prostrate or sprawling to suberect perennial 30–90+ cm high;
larger terminal joints bluish green, with some purplish pigmentation in cold weather, 10–34(–
40) cm long; spines usually dark brown, deflexed, 4–7 cm long, long and arching, some defi-
nitely flattened; flowers yellow or the bases reddish; fruits purplish, 31–62 mm long. May–Jun.
1. Spines over most of joint; spines 5–8 per areole above, 1–4 below; plants low-growing, semi-
   prostrate, spreading, forming clumps or rosettes of joints                                          var. camanchica
1. Spines usually on upper one-half, one-third, or less of joint; spines 1–3 per areole; plants ascend-
   ing and spreading, relatively larger, to 90+ cm tall                                                       var. major

var. camanchica (Engelm. & J.M. Bigelow) L.D. Benson, (of Camanche, CA). Sandy soils;
Lampasas Co. (Benson 1982); mainly Panhandle.
var. major Engelm., (greater), BROWN-SPINE PRICKLY-PEAR. Rocky, gravelly, or sandy soils of hill-
sides; c part of nc TX (Denton and Ellis cos.) w through w 2/3 of state.
Opuntia schottii Engelm., (for Richard van der Schott, d. 1819, head gardener at Austrian palace
at Schönbrunn), CLAVELLINA, DEVIL CHOLLA, SCHOTT’S CHOLLA, DOG CHOLLA. Clump- or mat-
forming cholla to 10 cm tall, the clumps or mats 1–3 m in diam.; terminal joints 4–6 cm long, 1.5–
2.5 cm in diam.; areoles (at least the uppermost) spiny; spines 6–12(–15) per areole; flowers yel-
low; fruits yellow, 38–56 mm long. Rocky soils; Brown Co. (Benson 1982), known from only one large
population w of Brownwood (J. Stanford, pers. comm.); mainly extreme w and s TX. Spring.
Opuntia tunicata (Lehm.) Link & Otto var. davisii (Engelm. & J.M. Bigelow) L.D. Benson, (sp.:
coated; var.: for Jefferson Davis who was Secretary of War when the Whipple expedition ex-
plored w TX), GREEN-FLOWER CHOLLA, JEFF DAVIS’ CHOLLA, JUMPING CHOLLA, JUMPING CACTUS.
Golden tan (from the color of spine sheaths) shrub 30–40(–100) cm tall, bushy or clump-form-
ing; joints strongly woody; terminal joints 5–15 cm long, 0.9–1.2 cm in diam.; spines 6–10 per ar-
eole, ca. 3.8 cm long, barbed, the sheaths 1.5–2 mm in diam., loose; fruits red, ca. 30 mm long.
Sandy soils; Brown (HPC) and Coryell (Benson 1982) cos.; scattered in w 2/3 of TX. Jun. The
sheaths conspicuously glisten in the sun giving the plants a “blond” appearance; the common
names JUMPING CHOLLA and JUMPING CACTUS were earned by the ease with which the joints
break off; they are easily attached to animals and thus dispersed (Kirkpatrick 1992); this results
in vegetative reproduction. m/101

Opuntia edwardsii Grant & Grant, a small subshrub 20–45 cm tall, native from the Edwards
Plateau to the Panhandle, occurs in Travis Co. just to the s of nc TX. It is in the O. phaeacantha
group and can be distinguished from O. phaeacantha and O. lindheimeri using the following
characters: joints 11–18 cm long, blue-green; spines white or ashy gray, deflexed, distributed over
the entire joint, 1.1–4.0 cm long (Grant & Grant 1979b). It would not be unexpected to find this
species in the Lampasas Cut Plain.

                                               THELOCACTUS
AA genus of 11 species of Mexico and the sw U.S.; small cacti with large flowers; some are cul-
tivated as ornamentals. (Greek: thele, a nipple, and cactus, name for another spiny plant; the ribs
of some species have a nipple-like appearance)
                                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        493




                                                                      FRUIT




                 PLANT FROM ABOVE
                                                                              SEED



                                Mammillaria heyderi [BEL]                                              Opuntia ficus-indica [NIC ]




                                                               SEED




Opuntia engelmannii var. lindheimeri [LUN]       Opuntia engelmannii var. linguiformis [BEL]           Opuntia kleiniae [ VIN]




                                 Opuntia humifusa [BEL, LUN]                                         Opuntia leptocaulis [BEL]
494   CALLITRICHACEAE/CALLITRICHE

Thelocactus setispinus (Engelm.) E.F. Anderson, (bristly spines), HEDGEHOG CACTUS. Minature
barrel cactus with stems solitary to sometimes several to numerous, ovoid or cylindroid, 3.8–
10(–20) cm long, 3.8–5 cm in diam., vertically ribbed; ribs ca. 13; spines smooth, not cross-
ribbed, dense but not obscuring stem; main central spine strongly hooked, 12–38 mm long; 1–3
smaller, straight, central spines also present; radial spines 12–15 per areole, ± straight; petal-like
structures clear yellow, red basally, the largest 20–25 mm long; fruits red, globular, ca. 9–12 mm
in diam. Black or clay soils, grasslands, mesquite thickets; Brown Co. (Stanford 1971) near w
margin of nc TX; also San Saba and Travis cos. just sw and s of nc TX; mainly e Edwards Plateau
s to se and s TX. [Echinocactus setispinusEngelm., Ferocactus setispinus (Englem.) L.D. Benson]
Benson (1982) treated this species in the genus Ferocactus. Early spring–late fall.


           CALLITRICHACEAE WATER STARWORT FAMILY
AA very small (17 species), nearly cosmopolitan family with a single genus. Based on molecu-
lar data, Reeves and Olmstead (1993) indicated that the Callitrichaceae should be considered
part of the Scrophulariaceae. (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: very small wet area annuals with tiny, entire, opposite or ap-
parently whorled leaves often forming rosettes at the stem tips, minute, solitary, axillary flow-
ers without a perianth, and often flattened, slightly heart-shaped fruits.
REFERENCE: Reeves & Olmstead 1993.

          CALLITRICHE WATERWORT, WATER STARWORT, WATER-CHICKWEED
Diminutive, glabrous annuals of shallow water or damp ground; leaves opposite or seemingly
whorled, linear to oblanceolate, entire; flowers minute, axillary, usually sessile or short-
pedicelled, unisexual; perianth absent; flowers consisting of a single stamen or a single pistil;
pistil of 2 carpels; fruits somewhat flattened laterally, often slightly heart-shaped and appear-
ing to have 2 lobes, eventually splitting into 4 achene-like mericarps.

ASome species are grown as aquarium plants, while others are sensitive to pollution and can
be used as ecological indicators—that is, their performance can be used to predict the presence
of pollutants. Both aerial and underwater (= hydrophily or more specifically, hypohydrophily)
pollination systems are known to occur in Callitriche ; it is the only genus in which both of
these systems have been confirmed (Philbrick 1993; Philbrick & Osborn 1994). Callitriche is
also one of only two dicot genera for which hydrophily has been documented; the other is
Ceratophyllum in the Ceratophyllaceae (Philbrick 1991, 1993). Microscopic examination of the
small fruits is necessary for definitive identification to species. The only 2 species to occur with
frequency in nc TX are C. heterophylla and C. nuttallii; additional distinguishing characters
between these 2 are given in the descriptions. The key to species is adapted from Fassett (1951).
(Greek: callos, beautiful, and thrix, hair, from the slender stems)
REFERENCES: Fassett 1951; Philbrick & Jansen 1991; Philbrick & Anderson 1992; Philbrick 1993;
Philbrick & Osborn 1994.

1. Plants either mostly terrestrial or on mud; fruits wider than high; stigmas 0.3–1 mm long; anthers
   0.1–0.2 mm wide; flowers without bracts; leaves ± uniform in shape.
   2. Fruit base greatly thickened or gibbose due to the 2 segments pushing against each other at
      base; fruits 0.3–0.8 mm wide                                                                      C. peploides
   2. Fruit base not thickened or gibbose; fruits 0.5–1.2 mm wide.
      3. Fruits pedicelled; stigma ca. 0.8 mm long; wing of thin margin of carpels turned outward at
         right angles or revolute and appearing like a thickened margin (under magnification)            C. nuttallii
      3. Fruits usually nearly sessile; stigma 0.2–0.4 mm long; carpels scarcely winged, under high
         magnification a very narrow wing seen                                                          C. terrestris
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS                 495




    Opuntia macrorhiza [BEL]          Opuntia phaeacantha var. major [BEL]                          Opuntia schottii [BEL]




                                                                                                                   SEED




                                                                                               AREOLE
                                                                         YOUNG FRUIT                                          FRUIT

Opuntia tunicata var. davisii [BR3]                                  Thelocactus setispinus [BEL]




 Callitriche heterophylla [GWO]               Callitriche nuttallii [CO 1]                          Callitriche palustris [MAS ]
496   CAMPANULACEAE

1. Plants completely submersed OR with terminal rosette of leaves floating OR stranded on mud;
   fruits as high as wide or slightly higher; stigmas 0.7–6 mm long; anthers 0.3–1.5 mm wide; flow-
   ers with 2 whitish inflated bracts at base; leaves often of various shapes.
   4. Fruits thickest at base; margins of carpels with a definite scarious wing; rare in nc TX (reported
      but no specimens seen)                                                                                 C. palustris
   4. Fruits thickest just below middle; margins of carpels usually wingless; commonly found in nc
      TX                                                                                                 C. heterophylla

Callitriche heterophylla Pursh, (various-leaved), LARGER WATERWORT. Flowers subtended by 2
small bracts (resembling stipules); fruits sessile or nearly so, very slightly 2-lobed. In quiet, clear
water; Burnet, Dallas, Grayson, Henderson, and Lamar cos.; nearly throughout TX. Late Mar–
Apr.

Callitriche nuttallii Torr., (for its discoverer, Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-American
botanist), NUTTALL’S WATERWORT. Moss-like; flowers without bracts; fruits in age with well-de-
veloped pedicels, deeply lobed. In damp silty or sandy places; se and e TX w to Navarro and
Lamar cos. on the e margin of nc TX; also Edwards Plateau. Late Mar–Apr.

Callitriche palustris L., (marsh-loving), COMMON WATERWORT. Fruits sessile, very slightly 2-
lobed. In quiet water; included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch
et al. (1990); mainly c and e TX. Mar–Jun. [C. verna L.]

Callitriche peploides Nutt., (resembling Peplis, now included in Lythrum—loosestrife), MAT
WATERWORT. Fruits sessile, moderately 2-lobed. Growing on mud, wet sand, and moist lawns;
Tarrant Co.; mainly se, e, and c TX. Feb–May.

Callitriche terrestris Raf., (of or growing in ground), ANNUAL WATERWORT. Fruits sessile or nearly
so, moderately 2-lobed. Damp to wet open areas of lawns, fallow fields, paths, or similar areas;
included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se, e, and
c TX. Mar–Jun.


               CAMPANULACEAE BLUEBELL, BELLFLOWER
                                      OR HAREBELL FAMILY
Ours annual, biennial, or perennial herbs; leaves alternate, simple, entire or toothed, sessile or
the lower petioled; stipules absent; flowers axillary or terminal, solitary or in racemes or spike-
like inflorescences; calyces with 5 acute or acuminate lobes; corollas sympetalous at least at
base, radially symmetrical and 5-lobed OR bilaterally symmetrical and 2-lipped OR (in cleis-
togamous forms of Triodanis) vestigial or absent; stamens 5; pistil 1; style 1; stigma 1; ovary infe-
rior, with placentation axile; fruit a capsule; seeds numerous.

AA medium-large (2,000 species in 82 genera) cosmopolitan family of herbs or rarely shrubs;
it includes a number of ornamentals in genera such as Campanula, Downingia, and Lobelia; 9
a number of species contain toxic alkaloids. The family is split by some authorities, with the
subfamily Lobelioideae sometimes recognized as a distinct family, the Lobeliaceae (e.g.,
Lammers 1992); Cronquist (1988), however, included the Lobelioideae and treated the family in
the broad sense. Recent molecular analyses (e.g., Michaels et al. 1993; Olmstead et al. 1993) indi-
cate that Campanulaceae are phylogenetically reasonably closely related to Asteraceae.
Sphenoclea zeylanica Gaertn. (PIEFRUIT, CHICKENSPIKE), here treated in the Sphenocleaceae, was
previously placed in the Campanulaceae; according to N. Morin (pers. comm.), it is not closely
related to Campanulaceae. Family name from Campanula, BELLFLOWER, an ornamentally im-
portant genus of 300 species of herbs or rarely shrubs native to the n temperate zone, especially
the Mediterranean, and tropical mountains. Campanula reverchonii A. Gray, (for Julien
                                                                                      LOBELIA /CAMPANULACEAE          497

Reverchon, 1837–1905, a French-American immigrant to Dallas and important botanical col-
lector of early TX), BASIN BELLFLOWER, is endemic to granite areas of the Central Mineral Region
just s of nc TX. It is a small (to 30 cm tall) annual with radially symmetrical, light blue corollas
9–13 mm long; it can be distinguished from Triodanis species by its long-peduncled flowers (at
least those of the main axes), narrowly funnelform corollas (tube portion 4–7 mm long), and
cleistogamous flowers absent. E (Diminutive of Latin: campana, bell, in reference to the shape
of the flowers) (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs with alternate simple leaves and sometimes milky sap,
inferior ovaries maturing into capsules with many seeds, showy, bilaterally (2–lipped) or radi-
ally symmetrical corollas, and sometimes fused anthers.
REFERENCES: McVaugh 1943, 1961; Diggs 1982; Rosatti 1986; Shetler & Morin 1986; Lammers
1992.

1. Corollas bilaterally symmetrical and 2-lipped (the dorsal lip with 2 lobes separated by a deep
   cleft, the ventral lip with 3 lobes); stamens united into a tube; flowers in terminal racemes or
   spike-like inflorescences; capsules opening by apical valves (Subfamily Lobelioideae)                         Lobelia
1. Corollas radially symmetrical or vestigial or absent; stamens separate; flowers axillary, sessile, 1–3
   per axil; capsules opening by 1–3 lateral pores (these positioned from near middle of the cap-
   sule to near its apex) (Subfamily Campanuloideae)                                                           Triodanis


                                                      LOBELIA
Perennial, biennial, or annual herbs often with milky juice; inflorescences often 1-sided; calyces
5-cleft, radially symmetrical; corollas bilaterally symmetrical, split nearly to base between 2
lobes of the dorsal lip, the tube fenestrate (= with lateral openings) or not so; stamens 5; fila-
ments united above into a tube; anthers united into a tube; ovary 2-carpellate.

AA genus of ca. 300 species of tropical and warm areas, especially the Americas; also a few in
temperate regions; 9 many have toxic alkaloids including lobelamine and lobeline (Krochmal
et al. 1972; Hardin & Arena 1974) and are strongly poisonous; according to some sources (e.g.,
Hewyood 1993), even smelling Lobelia tupa L. of Chile may cause sickness; some have been used
medicinally; lobeline has an effect on the central nervous system similar to nicotine (Blackwell
1990); a number are cultivated as ornamentals. Some Lobelia species can be hybridized (e.g., L.
cardinalis 3 L. siphilitica = L. 3speciosa Sweet) (e.g., Bowden 1964a, 1982); these are rarely found
in nature (McVaugh 1943) and are unknown from nc TX. (Named for Matthias de l’Obel, 1538–
1616, Flemish herbalist/botanist and physician to James I of England)

REFERENCES: McVaugh 1936, 1940; Bowden 1959a, 1960a, 1960b, 1961, 1964a, 1982; Krochmal et
al. 1972; McGregor 1985d; Lammers 1993; Thompson & Lammers 1997.

1. Corollas bright red; flowers (including calyx) 30–50 mm long; filaments including tube portion
   (but not anther tube) (15–)19–33 mm long                                                                 L. cardinalis
1. Corollas blue or violet; flowers 10–33 mm long; filaments including tube portion 2–15 mm long.
   2. Flowers 15–33 mm long; stems glabrous OR short hirsute or puberulent; filaments including
      tube portion 6–15 mm long; corolla tube fenestrate (= with 2 lateral slit-like openings as well
      as the dorsal split).
      3. Stems nearly glabrous to sparsely pubescent; flowers 23–33 mm long; corollas white-striped
         in throat; corolla tube often 5–10 mm wide; filaments including tube portion 10–15 mm
         long                                                                                               L. siphilitica
                                                                                                                         a
      3. Stems densely short hirsute or puberulent throughout; flowers 15–24 mm long; corollas
         not white-striped in throat; corolla tube 3–4 mm wide; filaments including tube portion 6–
         7 mm long                                                                                           L. puberula
498   CAMPANULACEAE/LOBELIA

  2. Flowers 10–15 mm long; stems glabrous or nearly so; filaments including tube portion 2–4
     mm long; corolla tube not fenestrate                                                  L. appendiculata

Lobelia appendiculata A. DC., (with an appendage), EARFLOWER. Slender annual or biennial
0.15–0.9(–1.1) m tall; stems glabrous or with a few basal hairs; leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtuse,
subentire or toothed; middle stem leaves usually clasping or subsessile with broad base, ± gla-
brous; flowers in loose spikes to 32 cm long; calyx lobes linear-lanceolate, usually densely bris-
tly-ciliate, sometimes only near tips, with conspicuous basal auricles that are flat, ciliate, lan-
ceolate, 1–3 mm long; inflorescences ± secund (= 1-sided); corollas light violet or light
lavender-blue to white; anther tube 2–2.5 mm long, bluish gray. Sandy open woods, fields, and
roadsides; Fannin, Henderson, and Lamar cos.; se and e TX w to e margin of nc TX. May–Jun.

Lobelia cardinalis L., (cardinal, in reference to the flower color), CARDINAL-FLOWER. Perennial to
1.3(–2) m tall, with basal offshoots; raceme terminal, to 50 cm long; calyx lobes foliaceous, to 14
mm long and 6 mm wide; corollas bright crimson red (rarely white or pink); corolla tube fenes-
trate; anther tube 4–5.5 mm long, bluish gray; capsules 8–10 mm long. Low moist areas, stream
banks; throughout TX. Mainly Sep–Oct. [L. cardinalis subsp. graminea (Lam.) McVaugh var.
phyllostachya(Engelm.) McVaugh] A BRIT/SMU sheet annotated by McVaugh as L. cardinalis
var. phyllostachysis known from Dallas. Bowden (1960b) indicated that plants from TX are dif-
ficult to classify and apparently represent hybrid swarms between L. cardinalis subsp.
cardinalis and L. cardinalis subsp. graminea var. phyllostachya. As can be seen from these ex-
amples, infraspecific taxa are often recognized in this species (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al.
1997). However, because of apparently unstable character combinations, we are following
Brooks (1986b) and Thompson and Lammers (1997) in not recognizing infraspecific taxa. Th-
ompson and Lammers (1997) concluded that all populations of the L. cardinalis complex
(sometimes divided into four species) occurring from s Canada to n Colombia should be recog-
nized as a single species without infraspecific taxa; they further concluded that L. cardinalis is
most closely related to L. siphilitica, with which it is known to hybridize. The flowers of this
species are visited by and presumably pollinated by ruby-throated hummingbirds
(Archilochus colubris) (James 1948). The entire plant is poisonous to humans and livestock,
sometimes fatally so, due to a mixture of pyridine alkaloids including lobeline; the sap can also
irritate the skin; it was at one time used to treat conditions including syphilis and worm infesta-
tions but because of severe illness or even death resulting from overdoses, its use has long been
discontinued (Krochmal et al. 1972; Turner & Szczawinski 1991). 9 m/96

Lobelia puberula Michx., (somewhat pubescent), DOWNY LOBELIA, PURPLE-DEWDROP. Perennial;
stems to 1.6(–2.7) m tall; racemes to 50 cm long; calyx lobes with small basal auricles; corollas
blue to purple (rarely white); anther tube 3–3.5 mm long, bluish gray; capsules 4–7 mm long.
Wooded areas to prairies or fields, usually in wet places; Henderson and Milam cos., also Lamar
Co. (Carr 1994); se and e TX w to e margin of nc TX. Aug–Dec. [L. puberula var. mineolana
Wimmer; L. puberula var. simulans Fernald] While varieties are sometimes recognized (e.g.,
Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997), we are not distinguishing infraspecific taxa in this variable spe-
cies. Lobeline and three other alkaloids are present in quantities similar to those in L. cardinalis
(Krochmal et al. 1972). 9

Lobelia siphilitica L. var. ludoviciana A. DC., (sp.: syphilitic, from supposed medicinal value; var.:
of Louisiana), BIG BLUE LOBELIA, BLUE CARDINAL -FLOWER, GREAT LOBELIA, LOUISIANA LOBELIA .
Nearly glabrous perennial with basal offshoots; stems to 1.3 m tall; racemes to 50 cm long; calyx
lobes foliaceous, to 14 mm long, with broad basal auricles 2–5 mm long; corollas blue, white
striped in throat; filament tube 12–15 mm long; anther tube 4–5 mm long, bluish gray; capsules
8–10 mm long. Low moist areas, prairies, woodlands; collected by Reverchon in Dallas Co. (Mahler
1988), also a Grayson Co. population (no longer extant) was observed for a number of years by
                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS            499




                                      Callitriche terrestris [CO1]



                                                                                    Lobelia appendiculata [HEA]



Callitriche peploides [CO1]




                                               Lobelia cardinalis [GLE]




             Lobelia puberula [CO1]                                              Lobelia siphilitica var. ludoviciana [STE]
500   CAMPANULACEAE/TRIODANIS

Sally Crosthwaite (pers. comm.); e TX w to nc TX. Aug–Sep. This species was used by Native
Americans and early settlers as a treatment for syphilis (Larsen 1940); according to Steyermark
(1963), it was also formerly used medicinally as an emetic and to relieve spasms of the air pas-
sages in cases of laryngitis and asthma. However, it is poisonous when taken in overdoses
(Steyermark 1963); lobeline and two other alkaloids are present (Krochmal et al. 1972). 9 m/96

Lobelia spicata Lam., (spicate, with spikes), PALE-SPIKE LOBELIA, HIGHBELIA, is known just to the e
and n of nc TX in e TX and OK. It can be distinguished from L. appendiculata (the most similar
nc TX species) using the following characters: stems densely short pubescent at base; middle
stem leaves not clasping, narrowed to base, with pubescence on both surfaces; inflorescences
usually not secund; calyx lobes glabrous or ciliate near their tips, with basal auricles that are
usually deflexed, glabrous, and filiform or shortly triangular. Reported to be poisonous (Burlage
1968). 9

                               TRIODANIS VENUS’-LOOKING-GLASS
Annuals with 1 or several, usually unbranched, densely leafy stems to ca. 1 m tall (usually
shorter); leaves mostly sessile, often clasping, usually < 3(–7) cm long, the upper gradually
smaller; flowers sessile; early flowers (cleistogamous, self-pollinated, in lower leaf axils) often
without corolla or corolla vestigial, maturing fruit very early; chasmogamous flowers with co-
rollas radially symmetrical, rotate, rather deeply 5-lobed, blue-purple to purple or rarely white;
capsules subcylindrical, opening by lateral pores (like window shades), the pores positioned
from near the middle of the capsule to its apex; seeds lenticular (quadrangular in 1 species) in
cross-section.

AA genus of 7 species, 6 in North America (1 extending to South America) and 1 in the Medi-
terranean region; previously lumped into the European and Mediterranean genus Legousia (=
Specularia ). All species, except the single one from the Old World (T. falcata (Ten.) McVaugh),
occur in nc TX. (Greek: tri , three, and odontos, a tooth, possibly in reference to the three calyx
lobes of some flowers)
REFERENCES: McVaugh 1945, 1948; Fernald 1946b; Bradley 1975.

1. Leaves (not bracts subtending flowers) with pubescence on the upper surface; calyx lobes 5, all
   in a given flower ± alike, usually 8–15 mm long; capsules of both cleistogamous and
   chasmogamous flowers usually with 3 locules and thus 3 pores; pores of capsule opening first at
   apex with covering of pore curling toward capsule base; in nc TX known only Bell and Williamson
   cos. near s margin of area                                                                       T. coloradoensis
1. Leaves glabrous on upper surface (or with a few bristles near tips); calyx lobes 3–5, often 3 in
   cleistogamous flowers or sometimes 1 or 2 much smaller than others, usually < 10 mm long
   (often much less); capsules of cleistogamous flowers usually with 1 or 2 locules and thus usually
   1 or 2 pores (chasmogamous flowers have 3 locules and 3 pores); pores of capsule opening first
   at base with covering of pore curling toward capsule apex; widespread in nc TX.
   2. Floral leaves (= bracts subtending flowers) narrow, oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate to nearly
      linear, 3.5–10 times as long as wide, not clasping; capsules of cleistogamous flowers often
      curved, subulate, usually 8–12(–20) mm long, dehiscent by fractures near apex or by a single
      pore near apex; capsules of chasmogamous flowers 15–20(–25) mm long                               T. leptocarpa
   2. Floral leaves broader, rhombic-lanceolate to semi-orbicular to reniform, 0.5–3 times as long as
      wide, not clasping to strongly clasping; capsules of cleistogamous flowers straight, not subu-
      late, usually < 8(–12) mm long, dehiscent by 2(–3) pores near capsule apex or middle; capsules
      of chasmogamous flowers usually 12 mm or less long.
      3. Pores of capsules near apex.
                                                                                TRIODANIS /CAMPANULACEAE          501

       4. Floral leaves longer than wide, mostly < 1 cm wide; seeds 0.4–0.65 mm long; widespread
          in nc TX                                                                         T. perfoliata var.. biflora
       4. Floral leaves wider than long to about as long as wide, mostly > 1 cm wide; seeds 0.7–1
          mm long; rare, in nc TX known from only from n edge of area                             T. lamprosperma
    3. Pores of capsules near middle.
       5. Pores linear or very narrowly oblong, 0.2–0.5 mm wide, the cartilage (which rolls out re-
          sulting in pore) before dehiscence with only very narrow scarious margins                    T. holzingerii
       5. Pores oblong-ovate or broader, 0.5–1.5 mm wide, the cartilage with broad scarious mar-
          gins (relative to cartilage width).
          6. Stems and underside of leaves glabrous, scabrous, or main veins pilose; seeds smooth
             or roughened by minute points                                             T. perfoliata var.. perfoliata
          6. Stems and underside of leaves densely hirsute or pilose; seeds reticulate (= with net-
             work of ridges)                                                                                T. texana

Triodanis coloradoensis (Buckley) McVaugh, (of the Colorado River area), COLORADO VENUS’-
LOOKING-GLASS, TEXAS VENUS’-LOOKING-GLASS, LINDHEIMER’S VENUS’-LOOKING-GLASS. Upper and
middle leaves oblanceolate to elliptic, to 7 cm long and 15 mm wide, sessile; lower leaves
broader, short petiolate; floral bracts lanceolate, attenuate; corollas of chasmogamous flowers
9–18 mm long; capsules from cleistogamous flowers 11–18 mm long, those from chasmogamous
flowers to 23 mm long; pores of capsules 1.5–2.5 mm below attachment of calyx lobes, 2–4 mm
long, 0.8–1.7 mm wide; seeds 0.8–1 mm long. Dry hillsides, bluffs, rocky ledges, woods, gravel
bars, floodplains; Bell and Williamson cos. (McVaugh 1945, 1961) on s margin of nc TX, also
Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); Edwards Plateau and adjacent areas; endemic to
TX. Apr–early Jun. [Campanula coloradoense Buckley, Legousia coloradoensis Briq., Specularia
coloradoensis Buckley ex Small, S. lindheimeri Vatke] This species is most similar to the Medi-
terranean T. falcata. (Ten.) McVaugh. E

Triodanis holzingeri McVaugh, (for John Mitchell Holzinger, 1853–1929, German-born
bryologist, who first noted its distinctions). Leaves ovate to elliptic or obovate, marginally
crenate; floral bracts broader than leaves, ovate; corollas of chasmogamous flowers 7–9(–11)
mm long; pores of capsules the narrowest of any nc TX species; seeds 0.3–0.7 mm long. Sandy
open woods and open ground; throughout much of TX. May–Jun. [Specularia holzingeri
(McVaugh) Fernald]

Triodanis lamprosperma McVaugh, (with shining seeds). Leaves broadly elliptic to obovate or
ovate, sometimes broadly so, apically acute, marginally crenate to nearly entire; floral bracts
often wider than long, to 25 mm wide; corollas of chasmogamous flowers 9–12 mm long; pores
of capsules broadly elliptic, 0.7–1.5 mm wide; seeds 0.7–1 mm long. Stream bottom woods;
Fannin and Grayson cos.; rare; ne TX w in Red River drainage to nc TX. May–Jun. [Specularia
lamprosperma (McVaugh) Fernald]

Triodanis leptocarpa (Nutt.) Nieuwl., (slender-fruited), SLIMPOD VENUS’-LOOKING-GLASS, SLENDER
VENUS’-LOOKING-GLASS. Leaves narrowly elliptic to lanceolate or oblanceolate, apically acute to
obtuse, marginally crenate; floral bracts narrower than leaves, apically acute to acuminate (vs.
acute to obtuse in other nc TX species except T. coloradoensis); corollas of chasmogamous flow-
ers mostly 7–10 mm long; capsules dimorphic: capsules of chasmogamous flowers ± straight,
linear (usually longer and relatively narrower than in other nc TX species), with 1 apical pore
(vs. 2 or 3 in other nc TX species); capsules of cleistogamous flowers curved, subulate; seeds 0.7–
1 mm long. Rocky limestone outcrops or less often sandy soils; nc TX and Edwards Plateau.
May–Jun. [Specularia leptocarpa (Nutt.) A. Gray]

Triodanis perfoliata (L.) Nieuwl., (with leaf surrounding the stem), HEN-AND-CHICKENS. Corollas
of chasmogamous flowers 5.5–12 mm long; seeds 0.5–0.6 mm long. Eroding or disturbed areas.
502   CANNABACEAE/CANNABIS

Bradley (1975) indicated that the following 2 taxa hybridize, that a gradient exists between
them, and that extensive cleistogamy in var. biflora results in a partial isolating mechanism
that allows individuals of that variety to be identified; he concluded that recognition at the va-
rietal level is most appropriate. See key to species to separate the 2 varieties.

var. biflora (Ruiz & Pav.) T.R. Bradley, (two-flowered), SMALL VENUS’-LOOKING-GLASS. Leaves not
clasping, longer than wide, apically acute to rarely obtuse, marginally crenate; floral bracts
longer than wide, mostly < 1 cm wide; cleistogamous flowers at nearly all nodes, each stem usu-
ally with 1 open terminal flower; pores of capsules oval to nearly round, ca. 1 mm in diam.
Brown, Denton, and Grayson cos., McVaugh (1961) cited numerous nc TX cos.; nearly through-
out TX. Apr–Jun. [T. biflora (Ruiz & Pav.) Greene, Specularia biflora (Ruiz & Pav.) Fisch. & C.A.
Mey.]

var. perfoliata, CLASPING VENUS’-LOOKING-GLASS. Leaves and floral bracts usually clasping, about
as wide or wider than long, apically broadly acute to rounded, marginally crenate to serrate;
each stem typically with more than 1 open flower; pores of capsules elliptic, 0.5–1.5 mm wide.
Collin and Grayson cos., McVaugh (1961) cited numerous nc TX cos.; nearly throughout TX.
Apr–May. [Specularia perfoliata (L.) A. DC.]

Triodanis texana McVaugh, (of Texas). Leaves ovate to elliptic or obovate, apically rounded to
obtuse (rarely acute), marginally crenate; corollas of chasmogamous flowers 7–14 mm long;
pores of capsules oval; seeds 0.4–0.6 mm long. Sandy open woods and open ground; Denton Co.,
also Dallas, Erath, and Milam cos. (McVaugh 1945, 1961); e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau;
endemic to TX. Apr–May. According to Shetler and Morin (1986), this species has seed morphol-
ogy unique within the genus (quadrangular in cross-section, different surface texture).
[Specularia texana (McVaugh) Fernald] E

Individuals intermediate between a number of the taxa above are known. These include those
that combine the characters of T. perfoliata var. perfoliata and T. perfoliata var. biflora; T.
perfoliata and T. texana; and T. perfoliata and T. holzingeri (McVaugh 1945). McVaugh (1945)
listed two nc TX collections (Bell Co., Erath Co.) for the last pair mentioned.


                        CANNABACEAE HEMP FAMILY
AThe Cannabaceae is a very small family (3–5 species in 2 genera—Kubitzki 1993)) of the n
temperate zone to se Asia; the species are erect or twining, wind-pollinated herbs with pyridine
alkaloids; the family is closely related to the Moraceae and Urticaceae. From a cladistic stand-
point these families should be lumped to form a more inclusive monophyletic family, which
based on nomenclatural rules should be called Urticaceae (Judd et al. 1994). The beer flavoring
HOPS comes from Humulus. The family is sometimes referred to as the Cannabidaceae; however,
the name Cannabaceae is conserved. (subclass Hamamelidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is an introduced annual herb with
palmately compound leaves with 3–9(–11) coarsely toothed leaflets and small flowers.
REFERENCES: Miller 1970; Kubitzki 1993b; Judd et al. 1994; Small 1997.

                                      CANNABIS HEMP
AA monotypic genus of c Asia; long in cultivation. (From the Greek name, kannabis, thought
by some to come from the Persian name, kanab, or the Arabic, kinnab)
REFERENCES: Emboden 1974; Small & Cronquist 1976; Small et al. 1976.

Cannabis sativa L., (cultivated), HEMP, MARIJUANA. Erect annual herb to 4 m tall; stems angled,
minutely pubescent; leaves palmately compound, the lower opposite, the upper alternate; leaf-
                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   503




                                      Triodanis holzingeri [HEA]




Triodanis coloradoensis [HEA]




                                   Triodanis lamprosperma [HEA]




  Triodanis leptocarpa [BB2]
504   CAPPARACEAE

lets 3–9(-11), narrowly lanceolate, coarsely and sharply toothed, scabrous above, pubescent be-
neath; stipules lance-linear; inflorescence a narrow, terminal panicle with leafy bracts, or the
flowers in mostly axillary, small, spike-like clusters; flowers unisexual, the sexes on separate
plants; staminate flowers on pedicels 0.5–3 mm long, the perianth greenish, 5-parted; pistillate
flowers sessile, enclosed by sepal-like bracts; achenes 2–5 mm long. Found in the city of Dallas
in Jun 1876 by Reverchon (Mahler 1988); scattered localities in TX. Jul–Oct. Native of c Asia. [C.
sativa subsp. indica (Lam.) E. Small & Cronquist] While infraspecific taxa are sometimes recog-
nized (e.g., Jones et al. 1997), according to Small (1997), “the chemical and morphologic distinc-
tions by which Cannabis has been split into taxa are often not readily discernible, appear to be
environmentally modifiable, and vary in a continuous fashion.” For these reasons we are not
recognizing taxa below the specific level. Cultivated for use as a psychoactive drug and as a
source of the fiber known as hemp which has numerous uses including rope, paper, cloth, and
nets; due to demand for rope, Cannabis was a major economic crop in the American colonies;
during World War II, because fiber supplies were low, the U.S. government encouraged and sub-
sidized the cultivation of Cannabis for hemp. It is one of the world’s oldest cultivated plants
having been domesticated for ca. 8500 years; the active ingredients are tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and related phenolic resins; it is controlled in the U.S. by the Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Act of 1970 and is used illegally as a recreational drug; medicinally, Cannabis is used in the treat-
ment of glaucoma and in combating the nausea experienced during cancer chemotherapy;
there are adverse effects from concentrated doses or heavy usage and the pollen can be a cause
of hay fever; a single inflorescence has been estimated capable of producing more than 500 mil-
lion pollen grains (Tippo & Stern 1977; Stephens 1980; Fuller & McClintock 1986; Mabberley
1987; Blackwell 1990; Turner & Szczawinski 1991; Kubitzki 1993b; Small 1997). 9 I


        CAPPARACEAE CAPER OR SPIDER-FLOWER FAMILY
Ours annuals with alternate, palmately compound leaves; leaflets entire or nearly so; flowers in
terminal, bracted racemes; sepals 4; petals 4, ± unequal, clawed; stamens 6 to many; pistil 1;
ovary superior; fruit a capsule.

AA medium-sized (650 species in 39 genera) mainly tropical and subtropical family with a
few in arid temperate regions; many species are woody and most produce mustard-oil gluco-
sides and in some cases alkaloids; capparids are similar in many respects to members of the
Brassicaceae. The Capparaceae are closely related to the Brassicaceae and are probably
paraphyletic when treated separately. From a cladistic standpoint the two should be lumped to
form a more inclusive monophyletic family, which based on nomenclatural rules, should be
called Brassicaceae (Judd et al. 1994). Family name from Capparis (CAPER), a genus of 250 spe-
cies of shrubs, scramblers, or trees of warm areas of the world. The spice capers are the flower
buds of Capparis species. The family is sometimes referred to as the Capparidaceae; however,
the name Capparaceae is conserved. (Greek: kapparis, capers) (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: annuals (many woody in other parts of the world) with pal-
mately compound leaves (3–7 leaflets); similar to Brassicaceae (e.g., flowers in racemes, 4 sepals,
4 petals) but with somewhat bilaterally symmetrical flowers (not cross-like as in Brassicaceae),
stamens never 4+2 (the condition in the Brassicaceae), inflorescence bracts often present (these
absent in Brassicaceae), and fruits lacking a transverse partition (this present in Brassicaceae).
REFERENCES: Iltis 1957, 1958 [1959]; Ernst 1963a; Judd et al. 1994.

1. Stems glandular-pubescent, at least in upper part (use lens); petals white or yellowish, some-
   times pinkish or purple-tinged or pink to purple; mature capsules 40–100 mm long, very much
   longer than wide; stamens sometimes much exceeding the petals.
   2. Leaflets 3; plants unarmed; stamens 6–20, of unequal lengths, exposed in bud; petals white to
                                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      505




                                                                                                        Cannabis sativa [REE]




Triodanis perfoliata var. biflora [GLE]        Triodanis perfoliata var. perfoliata [STE]

                                                                                                         Cleome hassleriana [BL2]




                                    Triodanis texana [HEA]                                                 Cleomella angustifolia [IPL]
506   CAPPARACEAE/CLEOME

      yellowish, sometimes pinkish-tinged or purplish-tinged, 5–16 mm long; fruits without a stipe
      or on a short stipe (to ca. 14 mm long) beyond the 10–40 mm long pedicel                          Polanisia
   2. Leaflets 5 or 7; plants armed with prickles; stamens 6, of equal length, covered in bud by the
      overlapping petals; petals pink to purple (rarely white), 20–40 mm long; fruits on an elongate
      slender stipe 30–80 mm long (beyond the 20–40 mm long pedicel)                                      Cleome
1. Stems glabrous; petals deep yellow; mature capsules 5–10 mm long, ca. as wide as long; stamens
   equaling or barely exceeding the petals                                                             Cleomella


                               CLEOME SPIDER-FLOWER, BEEPLANT
AA genus of 150 species of tropical and warm areas of the world; a number are cultivated as
ornamentals, for medicinal uses, or for edible seeds. (Name of unknown origin; applied early to
some mustard-like plant)
REFERENCE: Iltis 1959.

Cleome hassleriana Chodat, (for Emile Hassler, 1861–1937, Swiss botanical collector and physi-
cian who settled in Paraguay), SPIDERPLANT, SPIDER-FLOWER, SPINY SPIDER-FLOWER, PINK-QUEEN.
Plant robust, 1–2 m tall, armed, strongly scented; leaflets oblanceolate-elliptic to nearly elliptic,
to 12 cm long; racemes dense, to 1 m long; petals showy; anthers ca. 1 cm long; capsules linear-
cylindric, to 4 mm thick, divergent to deflexed. Cultivated and apparently escapes; included
based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), also s TX. Apr–Oct. Native
of South America. I

                                       CLEOMELLA RHOMBOPOD
AA genus of 10 species of sw North America. (Diminutive of Cleome)
REFERENCE: Payson 1922b.

Cleomella angustifolia Torr., (narrow-leaved), NARROW-LEAF RHOMBOPOD. Plant glabrous, erect,
ca. 0.2–2(–2.6) m tall; leaves 3-foliolate; leaflets linear-elliptic, 2–8 mm wide; petals 4–6 mm
long; capsules 5–9 mm wide, rhomboid-obdeltoid (like a distorted triangle); seeds 3–6 per cap-
sule. Draws, ditch bottoms, and roadsides, sandy soils; Clay, Jack, and Montague cos.; West Cross
Timbers w to Rolling Plains and s to Edwards Plateau. Jul–Oct.

                                      POLANISIA CLAMMYWEED
Herbaceous glandular-pubescent annuals with strong odor; leaves 3-foliolate, petiolate; petals
(in ours) with a long claw prominent nectary gland present in flowers; capsules elongate, erect,
dehiscing apically by valves; seeds numerous.

AA North American genus of 6 species; thought to be related to xerophytic African Cleome
species and often lumped into that genus. (Greek: polys, many, and anisos, unequal, in reference
to the characters by which the stamens differ from those of Cleome)
REFERENCES: Iltis 1958, 1966.

1. Leaflets lanceolate or elliptic to rhombic-orbicular or ovate, 10–30 mm wide; petals slightly un-
   equal, entire or notched; stamens 9–30 mm long; capsules 5–10 mm wide                             P. dodecandraa
1. Leaflets linear, 1–5 mm wide; petals very unequal (upper 2 much larger than lower), with deeply
   ragged margin; stamens 6–12 mm long; capsules 1.5–3.5(–5) mm wide                                       P. erosa

Polanisia dodecandra (L.) DC. subsp. trachysperma (Torr. & A. Gray) H.H. Iltis, (sp.: twelve-
stamened; subsp.: rough-seeded), CLAMMYWEED. Plant 20–100 cm tall; leaflets oblanceolate, 20–
40 mm long; petals 5–16 mm long, white or sometimes with purplish tinge; stamens 6–20, pink
to purple; nectary gland solid, truncate to shallowly concave, 1–2 mm long, yellowish, the apex
                                                                                              CAPRIFOLIACEAE        507

orange to orange-red; capsules 20–70 mm long; seeds many. Sandy stream banks, roadsides,
and disturbed sites; widespread in TX, apparently native from West Cross Timbers westward
(Mahler 1988), local e to Bell, Dallas, Denton, Falls, Grayson, and McLennan cos. May–Oct.
[Polanisia trachysperma Torr. & A. Gray] Touching the foliage transfers a strong-smelling sub-
stance that makes the hands sticky or clammy. m/103

Polanisia erosa (Nutt.) H.H. Iltis, (jagged as if gnawed, in reference to petal margin), LARGE
CLAMMYWEED, LARGE CRESTPETAL. Plant 20–60 cm tall; leaflets linear to oblanceolate, 10–40
mm long; upper (larger) petals 6–11 mm long, white to pale-yellow, sometimes with pink tinge,
the claw purplish pink; stamens 6–15, pink; nectary gland tubular, truncate, 3.5–5.5 mm long,
0.9 mm in diam., yellow, drying pink-purple, persistent in fruit at base of gynophore; capsules
20–60 mm long, with 6–36 seeds; stipe (= gynophore) (4–)7–14 mm long. Loose sand; Dallas,
Limestone, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers. Late May–Oct. Some-
times segregated into the genus Cristaltella [as C. erosa Nutt.].


                 CAPRIFOLIACEAE HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY
Herbs, shrubs, trees, or woody vines; leaves opposite, sessile or petioled, simple or pinnately
compound, entire, toothed, or lobed; flowers axillary or terminal, solitary, in pairs, or in spikes,
whorls, umbels, or cymes; calyx lobes minute to large, 3–5; corollas 2-lipped or radially sym-
metrical and 4–5-lobed, funnelform or tubular to rotate; stamens 4 or 5; pistil 1; style and stigma
1; ovary half to wholly inferior; fruit in ours a drupe or berry.

AA small (420 species in 15 genera), nearly cosmopolitan family of shrubs or small trees or
less frequently lianas or herbs; it includes a number of ornamentals such as Abelia, Weigela,
Lonicera, and Symphoricarpos. Based on a cladistic analysis, Judd et al. (1994) suggested segre-
gating Sambucus, Viburnum, and relatives into the family Adoxaceae. They further suggested
including the Valerianaceae and Dipsacaceae with the remaining Caprifoliacaeae to form a
more inclusive monophyletic Caprifoliaceae. Family name from Caprifolium, a genus now
treated as Lonicera. (Latin: capra, goat, and folius, leaved, from the foliage being used as goat
fodder) (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: shrubs or vines (1 herb) with similarities to the Rubiaceae
(e.g., opposite leaves, ± inferior ovaries) but Caprifoliaceae usually lack stipules and typically
have larger showier flowers with the flower parts mostly in 5s (Rubiaceae have stipules and
flower parts often in 4s).
REFERENCES: Ferguson 1966a; Brooks 1986c; Donoghue et al. 1992; Judd et al. 1994.

1. Leaves pinnately compound; fruits 4–6 mm in diam., purple-black, numerous                                 Sambucus
1. Leaves simple; fruits not as above.
   2. Plants erect herbs to 80 cm tall; flowers usually solitary in the leaf axils                           Triosteum
   2. Plants woody, either vines, shrubs, or small trees; flowers either not axillary, or if axillary then
      not solitary.
      3. Leaves usually with distinct teeth; corollas rotate or shallowly funnelform, radially symmetrical;
         flowers small and many, in terminal cymes; fruits 10–15 mm long, dark blue.                          Viburnum
      3. Leaves usually without teeth (however, the morphologicaly different juvenile leaves (= those
         on new growth) can have teeth, lobing, or wavy edges); corollas funnelform to long-tubular,
         nearly radially symmetrical to 2-lipped; flowers few or many, axillary or terminal, in pairs or
         spikes or whorls; fruits differing from above in either size or color or both.
         4. Corollas 10–50 mm long, often bilaterally symmetrical; leaves often > 4 cm long; plants
            shrubs or twining or trailing vines; fruits with several seeds                                     Loniceraa
         4. Corollas 2.5–5 mm long, nearly radially symmetrical; leaves usually < 4 cm long; plants
            small shrubs to only 2 m tall; fruits with 2 seeds                                           Symphoricarpos
508   CAPRIFOLIACEAE/LONICERA

                                      LONICERA HONEYSUCKLE
Vines or shrubs; leaves short-petioled or sessile, entire; flowers axillary or terminal, rather large
and showy; fruit a several-seeded berry.

AA genus of 180 species of the n hemisphere s to Mexico and the Philippines; many are culti-
vated as ornamentals and a number have become serious invasive weeds; some have very fra-
grant flowers. (Named for Adam Lonitzer, 1528–86, German naturalist and herbalist)
REFERENCES: Rehder 1903; Luken & Thieret 1995, 1996.

1. Uppermost leaves united around stem; flowers terminal, in heads or in whorls forming spikes;
   twining, trailing or climbing vines.
   2. Corollas 25–50 mm long, partly or wholly red, purple, or pink                                L. sempervirens
   2. Corollas 12–18 mm long, creamy white                                                               L. albiflora
                                                                                                                    a
1. Uppermost leaves separate, short-petioled; flowers axillary or both axillary and terminal, mostly
   in 2s; vines or shrubs.
   3. Twining, trailing or climbing vines; corolla tube > 15 mm long                                     L. japonicaa
   3. Shrubs; corolla tube < 15 mm long.
      4. Leaves acuminate apically; branches hollow, with brown pith                                      L. maackii
      4. Leaves rounded or acute apically (but short apiculate); branches with solid white pith
                                                                                                  L. fragrantissima

Lonicera albiflora Torr. & A. Gray, (white-flowered), WHITE HONEYSUCKLE, BUSHY HONEYSUCKLE.
Evergreen, low, shrubby vine with arched to twining branches; young stems usually glabrous
(rarely with sparse pubescence); leaves sessile or subsessile; leaf blades variable in shape, ellip-
tic to ovate, suborbicular, rhombic, or obovate, (1.5–)2–4(–6.5) cm long, ± coriaceous, apically
usually rounded (rarely broadly acute); upper surface of leaf blades gray-green or yellow-green,
the lower surface variously glaucous; typically only the terminal pair of leaves perfoliate; fruits
reddish orange, 5–15 mm in diam. Limestone outcrops; Blackland Prairie (Austin Chalk) s and
w to w TX. Apr–May. [L. albiflora var. dumosa (A. Gray) Rehder] The fruits are reported to con-
tain a substance that induces vomiting (Powell 1988). 9

Lonicera fragrantissima Lindl. & Paxton, (very fragrant), SWEET-BREATH-OF-SPRING. Semi-ever-
green shrub to ca. 3 m tall; leaves short petioled; leaf blades broadly oval, to ca. 8 cm long,
strongly apiculate; flowers fragrant, several pairs in leaf axils; corollas ca. 16 mm long, creamy
white, sometimes tinged with pink, the tube ca. 5–6 mm long; fruits orange to red, 8–10 mm
long. Widely cultivated and escapes, forest margins; Collin Co. (Heard Museum property), also
Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); we do not know of other TX reports. Jan–Apr. Native of
China. I

Lonicera japonica Thunb., (of Japan), JAPANESE HONEYSUCKLE . Trailing or twining vine, ever-
green; young stems usually densely pubescent to almost glabrous; leaves short-petioled; leaf
blades oblong-ovate or oblong-lanceolate, those on new spring or summer growth (= juvenile
leaves) often pinnatifid; flowers very fragrant; corollas 25–40 mm long, creamy white or white
tinged with purple, becoming yellow with age, eventually changing to brownish, the tube pu-
bescent outside, the upper lip with at least 2 of its lobes united more than half way; fruits black,
5–8 mm in diam. Cultivated, escaped, and locally established in disturbed areas, woods, and
thickets; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Can be an invasive pest overtak-
ing the habitat of native species. Mar–Jul. Native of Asia. I

Lonicera maackii (Rupr.) Maxim., (for Richard Maach, 1825–1886, Russian naturalist), AMUR
HONEYSUCKLE, BUSH HONEYSUCKLE, TREE HONEYSUCKLE, MAACK’S HONEYSUCKLE. Shrub to ca. 6 m
tall, deciduous but leafing out very early and holding leaves late; leaves short-petioled; leaf
blades to ca. 8 cm long, acuminate; flowers fragrant, in axillary pairs; corollas white becoming
                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS         509




             Polansia dodecandra subsp. trachysperma [GR1]
                                                                                     Polansia erosa [HEA]




                                                                                                   Lonicera japonica [REE]


                                           Lonicera fragrantissima [CUR]
Lonicera albiflora [VIN]




                  Lonicera maackii [SID]                                   Lonicera sempervirens [BT3]
510   CAPRIFOLIACEAE/SAMBUCUS

yellow, ca. 20 mm long; fruits dark red, 2–4 mm in diam. Widely cultivated and escapes, calcar-
eous slopes and forest margins; Dallas Co., also Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); first re-
ferred to as a weed in the U.S. in Chicago in 1924 and now considered problematic in some areas
of the e U.S. (Luken et al. 1995). Mar. Native of c and ne China, the Amur River and Ussuri River
valleys, Korea, and Japan (Luken & Thieret 1996). I

Lonicera sempervirens L., (evergreen), CORAL HONEYSUCKLE, TRUMPET HONEYSUCKLE, EVERGREEN
HONEYSUCKLE. Glabrous, evergreen, twining vine; young stems glabrous or nearly so; leaves
sessile or subsessile; leaf blades ovate to elliptic or obovate, 3–6(–7) cm long, 2–4 cm wide, sub-
coriaceous, apically obtuse to acute; upper surface of leaf blades olive-green or dark green, the
lower surface lighter than the upper, often glaucous; terminal 1–2(–several) pairs of leaves per-
foliate; corollas tubular, usually red outside, orange inside, shallowly lobed, lobes nearly equal; fruits
red or reddish orange, 6–10 mm in diam. Stream banks or hillside woods, also cultivated; se and
e TX w to West Cross Timbers. Mar–Apr. The flowers of this species are visited by and presum-
ably pollinated by ruby-throated hummingbirds (Archilochus colubris) (James 1948). m/96

                                    SAMBUCUS ELDERBERRY
AA temperate and subtropical genus of 9 species of shrubs and small trees often with alka-
loids and extrafloral nectaries; some are cultivated as ornamentals or used for their edible fruit;
9 however, some species have toxic fruit. While we are treating Sambucus in the
Caprifoliaceae, Bolli (1994) indicated that even though many authors regard Sambucus as most
closely related to Viburnum, the genus is isolated and he recommended that it be treated in the
unigeneric family Sambucaceae. (The Latin name, perhaps from the Greek: sambuce, an an-
cient musical instrument; because of the readily removed tubes of bark, these were used for
flutes and whistles)
REFERENCE: Bolli 1994.

Sambucus nigra L. var. canadensis (L.) Bolli, (sp.: black; var.: of Canada), COMMON ELDERBERRY,
AMERICAN ELDERBERRY. Coarse perennial, developing pithy-woody stems, becoming shrubby, 1–
4 m tall; leaflets 5–7(–11), broadly lanceolate, abruptly acuminate, finely and sharply toothed,
glabrous to densely soft-pubescent beneath; flowers small, in broad, flat-topped corymbs; co-
rollas creamy white, ca. 5 mm wide; fruit a 3-stoned, purple-black, berry-like drupe 4–6 mm in
diam. Stream bottoms and ditch banks, in shade or sun; mainly e 1/2 of TX, scattered further w.
May–Jun, sporadically to Sep. [S. canadensis L., S. canadensis L. var. submollisRehder] While this
species has long been recognized as S. canadensis (e.g., Correll & Johnston 1970; Kartesz 1994;
Jones et al. 1997), we are following Bolli’s (1994) revision of the genus for nomenclature of this
species; he recognized it as being composed of 6 subspecies indicating “… it is important to em-
phasize the close relationship and morphological similarity of all subspecies of S. nigra.” Even
though the ripe fruits are edible when cooked (Lampe & McCann 1985) and used in making
wines and jellies, the roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and unripe fruits contain a poisonous alkaloid
and cyanogenic glycoside (Hardin & Arena 1974); during frontier days the leaves were dried
and used as an insecticide (Crosswhite 1980). 9

                      SYMPHORICARPOS CORAL-BERRY, SNOWBERRY
AA genus of 17 species of deciduous shrubs of North America and China; some are cultivated
as ornamentals. 9 The fruits of some species are reportedly toxic if ingested in quantity
(Lampe & McCann 1985). (Greek: symphorein, to bear together, and carpos, fruit; from the clus-
tered fruits)
REFERENCE: Jones 1940.

Symphoricarpos orbiculatus Moench, (orbicular, round), INDIAN -CURRANT, CORAL-BERRY,
                                                                           CARYOPHYLLACEAE     511

BUCKBRUSH. Short, rhizomatous, inconspicuously pubescent, erect to ascending shrub to ca. 2 m
tall; leaves very short-petioled; leaf blades elliptic-orbicular, entire or with a few blunt teeth,
usually < 4 cm long, rarely to 6 cm; flowers in small dense axillary spikes, rather inconspicu-
ous; corollas funnelform, 3–5 mm long, greenish white, sometimes partly brown-red; drupes
usually with 2 stones, coral-red to pink or purple-tinged, 5–7 mm long, long persisting. Woods
and thickets; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau; increasing under dis-
turbance. Jun–Aug. Reported to be poisonous (Burlage 1968). 9

                       TRIOSTEUM FEVERWORT, HORSE-GENTIAN
AA genus of 5–6 species of perennial herbs of e Asia and e North America; this disjunct distri-
bution pattern is discussed under the genera Campsis (Bignoniaceae) and Carya
(Juglandaceae). (Greek: tri , three, and osteon, bone, alluding to 3 bony nutlets)
REFERENCE: Lewis & Frantz 1973.

Triosteum angustifolium L., (narrow-leaved), YELLOW-FLOWERED HORSE-GENTIAN. Perennial herb
to ca. 80 cm tall; stems long-hirsute, the hairs 1–4 mm long; leaves narrowly obovate to lan-
ceolate, to ca. 15 cm long, apically acuminate; flowers usually solitary in the leaf axils, sub-
tended by a pair of bracts; calyx lobes 7–13 cm long; corollas tubular, greenish or yellowish
white or yellowish, 12–15 mm long; fruit a pale orange drupe 5–7 mm in diam., usually with 3
nutlets. Wooded areas, thickets; Grayson Co. in Red River drainage, also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994);
mainly e TX. Mar–May.

                                VIBURNUM ARROW-WOOD
AA genus of 150 species of small trees and shrubs of temperate and warm areas, especially
Asia and North America; a number of species are important ornamental shrubs with con-
spicuous flowers and ornamental fruits; some species have the marginal flowers of the inflores-
cence sterile and enlarged; 9 fruits of different species are variously edible or poisonous. (The
classical Latin name for V. lantana L.)
REFERENCES: Egolf 1962; Donoghue 1983.

Viburnum rufidulum Raf., (somewhat rufid, reddish), SOUTHERN BLACKHAW, DOWNY VIBURNUM,
NANNY-BERRY, RUSTY BLACKHAW. Shrub or small tree to 10 m tall, deciduous; leaves reddish-pu-
bescent on petiole and along midrib beneath; leaf blades finely toothed, unlobed, elliptic-lan-
ceolate to orbicular; flowers numerous, in terminal, compound, dense umbels; corollas rotate or
shallowly funnelform, white; drupes blue-black, glaucous, 10–15 mm long, 1-seeded. Rocky or
sandy woods; widespread in TX, particularly the e 1/2. Apr. Correll and Johnston (1970) and
Cox and Leslie (1991) indicated that the fruit pulp is sweet and edible with a raisin-like taste.


       CARYOPHYLLACEAE PINK OR CARNATION FAMILY
Ours annual, biennial, or perennial herbs; stems often with swollen nodes; leaves opposite,
simple, entire; stipules scarious or absent; flowers solitary or inflorescences cymose, panicle-
like, or capitate; sepals or tepals (4–)5; petals 0–5 (or more in cultivated forms), often notched
(“pinked”) at apex, frequently differentiated into claw and blade, sometimes with a crown of
appendages (projections or scales) at junction of claw and blade; stamens (1–)5–10; pistil 1; ovary
superior; placentation usually free-central or basal; fruit a capsule dehiscing apically by valves
or teeth or an utricle.

AA large (ca. 2,200 species in ca. 86 genera—Bittrich 1993), cosmopolitan, but especially tem-
perate and warm n hemisphere family of mostly herbs or rarely shrubs or small trees. It in-
cludes ornamentals such as Dianthus (CARNATION , SWEET-WILLIAM) and Gypsophila (BABY’S-
512    CARYOPHYLLACEAE

BREATH). The family is unusual in its subclass in having anthocyanin rather than betalain pig-
ments (Cronquist & Thorne 1994); however, molecular analyses link it with other members of
the Caryophyllales (Giannasi et al. 1992; Downie & Palmer 1994). The common name PINK is an
old name probably referring to the notched or “pinked” petals (as in pinking shears). Family
name conserved from Caryophyllus Mill., a genus now treated as Dianthus (the name Dianthus
was published earlier and thus has priority in terms of nomenclature). In pre-Linnaean times,
some authorities (e.g., Tournefort) referred to all PINKS as belonging to the genus Caryophyllus;
Linnaeus, however, used the name for Syzygium aromaticum (L.) Merr. & L.M. Perry, CLOVES or
CLOVE TREE, of the Myrtaceae; Caryophyllus L. has been rejected in favor of Syzygium (Farr et al.
1979). Linnaeus did use “caryophyllus” as an epithet for one of the familiar carnations also
known as the CLOVE PINK (Bailey 1938). (Greek: caryon, nut, and phyllon, leaf, possibly in refer-
ence to the capsular or utricular fruit being subtended by bracts—R. Rabeler, pers. comm.) (sub-
class Caryophyllidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs with opposite, simple, entire leaves, swollen nodes, and
separate, often notched petals frequently with claw and blade; fruit often a toothed or valved
capsule.
REFERENCES: Larsen 1986; Rabeler & Thieret 1988; Giannasi et al. 1992; Bittrich 1993; Behnke &
Mabry 1994; Downie & Palmer 1994.

1. Flowers or several-flowered head-like clusters subtended by 2–3 pairs of conspicuous, broadly
   ovate-oblong or obovate, scarious (= dry, not green) bracts; rare introduced species                         Petrorhagia
1. Flowers or inflorescences without bracts OR bracts very different from those above (e.g., in Dian-
   thus bracts linear or lance-linear, not scarious); widespread native and introduced species.
   2. Stipules present.
      3. Leaves elliptic, ovate, or obovate AND plants prostrate or decumbent; lower leaves usually
         in whorls of 4 or apparently so; introduced species rare in nc TX, known only from s part of
         Lampasas Cut Plain                                                                                     Polycarpon
      3. Leaves linear to filiform, needle-like, elliptic, or oblanceolate, if elliptic or oblanceolate, then
         plants neither prostrate nor decumbent; lower leaves not in whorls of 4, instead either op-
         posite OR needle-like and crowded; including species widespread in nc TX.
         4. Petals absent or minute; sepals green to yellow or brown, sometimes white apically;
            stipules ovate-lanceolate to linear, 2–6 times as long as wide; widespread in nc TX.
            5. Sepals acute to acuminate or with minute awn-point at apex, entire; fruit a single-
               seeded utricle                                                                                   Paronychia
            5. Sepals rather abruptly narrowed to an awn-like tip about half their total length, the
               outer 3 with a distinct bristle-tooth on each side from about the middle; fruit a several-
               seeded capsule                                                                                    Loeflingia
         4. Petals present, white or pink; stipules triangular, not over twice as long as wide; rare in nc
            TX                                                                                                  Spergularia
   2. Stipules absent.
      6. Sepals separate or united only at base; petals not differentiated into claw and blade.
         7. Petals split more than half way to base (corollas apparently of 10 petals)                             Stellaria
         7. Petals entire OR divided less than half way to base OR absent.
            8. Petals absent.
               9. Leaf blades very narrow, < 1 mm wide, glabrous; capsules opening apically by 4–5
                  valves; calyces without a red band at base; styles equal in number to capsule valves
                                                                                                                    Sagina
             9. Leaf blades usually > 1 mm wide, glabrous or pubescent; capsules opening apically
                by 6 valves or 10 teeth; calyces with a red band at base OR not so; styles half as many
                as capsule valves or teeth.
                10. Capsules opening apically by 6 valves (opening to ca. middle of capsule); styles
                                                                         AGROSTEMMA/CARYOPHYLLACEAE              513

                     usually 3; plants ± glabrous or with inconspicuous pubescence, the pubescence
                     if present not glandular                                                               Stellaria
                10. Capsules opening apically by 10 teeth (opening only at very apex); styles usu-
                     ally 5; plants with obvious pubescence, the pubescence usually glandular, at
                     least in the inflorescences                                                          Cerastium
          8. Petals present.
              11. Styles 3; petals 2–15 mm long; capsules opening apically by 3 or 6 valves.
                  12. Petals 2–4 mm long, shorter than the sepals, acute, entire at apex; sepals 2–4
                       mm long; capsules opening apically by 6 valves                                      Arenaria
                  12. Petals 5–15 mm long, longer than the sepals, toothed or shallowly notched at
                       apex; sepals 2.5–8 mm long; capsules opening apically by 3 valves                  Minuartia
              11. Styles 5 (occasionally 4); petals ca. 1–7 mm long; capsules opening apically by 10
                  teeth or 4–5 valves.
                  13. Petals toothed or notched at apex; leaves ± pubescent, oblong or lanceolate
                       to elliptic or obovate; capsules opening apically by 10 teeth                      Cerastium
                  13. Petals entire; leaves glabrous, narrowly linear; capsules opening apically by 4–
                       5 valves                                                                               Sagina
    6. Sepals united 1/3 or more (may have separate bracts outside), often forming a campanu-
       late, funnelform, cylindric or inflated calyx tube; petals often, but not always, clawed.
       14. Flowers in dense head-like cymes; calyces each with 2–several bracts at base; petals
            white to variously colored, often minutely dotted with white                                   Dianthus
       14. Flowers in very open to congested cymes; calyces without bracts at base; petals white
            to variously colored but if colored not minutely dotted with white.
            15. Calyx lobes 15–45 mm long, longer than calyx tube; styles (4–)5; petals usually pur-
                 plish red, 24–36 mm long including claw, without a crown of projections or scales
                 on upper (inner) side at junction of blade and claw                                    Agrostemma
            15. Calyx lobes 0.5–5 mm long, shorter than calyx tube; styles 2–3(–4); petals white to
                 pinkish or purplish, 5–38 mm long including claw, without OR with a crown.
                 16. Leaves not clasping; calyces 10–20-nerved, not angled, cylindric to campanu-
                      late to funnelform in fruit; petals white to pinkish or purplish, with a crown of
                      projections or scales on upper (inner) side at junction of blade and claw OR
                      without a crown.
                      17. Styles 3(–4); inflorescences open; calyx tube 5–10 mm long; petals with
                           crown absent or minute; capsules opening apically by 6 teeth                        Silene
                      17. Styles usually 2; inflorescences congested; calyx tube 12–20 mm long; pet-
                           als crowned with an appendage at top of the claw; capsules opening apically
                           by 4 teeth                                                                     Saponaria
                 16. Leaves clasping; calyces strongly 5-angled or winged, inflated in fruit, ovoid;
                      petals lavender-pink, without a crown                                                Vaccaria


                                   AGROSTEMMA CORN-COCKLE
AA temperate Eurasian genus of 2 species. (Greek: agros, field, and stemma, a crown or garland,
Linnaeus apparently believing it was suitable for such a use)

Agrostemma githago L., (an old generic name for Agrostemma), COMMON CORN-COCKLE. Erect
taprooted annual or biennial 0.3–1 m tall; stems simple or few-branched, densely pubescent
with appressed hairs; leaves linear to lanceolate, 4–12 cm long, 1–10 mm wide, sessile, entire;
stipules absent; flowers 1 per node, on elongate peduncles to 20 cm long; calyx tube 10-ribbed,
10–18 mm long; calyx lobes 15–45 mm long, longer than the tube, linear or lance-linear; petals
24–36 mm long including claw, usually purplish red, with small black dots along veins near
514   CARYOPHYLLACEAE/ARENARIA

base; capsules 18–22 mm long, opening by (4–)5 teeth, many-seeded. Disturbed areas; a 1998
Parker Co. collection is the first documented for nc TX. Mar–Jul. Native of Europe. The seeds are
possibly poisonous due to saponins (Mabberley 1997). 9

                               ARENARIA SANDWORT, CHICKWEED
Our species small annuals; flowers terminal, solitary or cymose; petals white, entire, shorter
than the sepals; fruit a capsule opening by 6 valves.

AA n temperate genus of ca. 150 species (Bittrich 1993) including some cultivated ornamen-
tals. Some species previously included in Arenaria are now treated in Minuartia . (Latin: from
arena , sand, in which many of the species grow)
REFERENCES: Maguire 1947, 1951; Shinners 1962c; McNeill 1980; Wofford 1981.

1. Sepals glabrous; pedicels 2–15 mm long in flower, up to 35 mm in fruit; on limestone          A. benthamii
1. Sepals minutely scabrous-pubescent; pedicels 1–3 mm long in flower, up to 10 mm in fruit; in
   sand                                                                                         A. serpyllifolia

Arenaria benthamii Fenzl ex Torr. & A. Gray, (for George Bentham, 1800–1884, English taxono-
mist and president of Linnaean Society), HILLY SANDWORT. Plant to 50 cm tall; leaves oblong-
lanceolate or oblanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, to 2 cm long, usually smaller. Limestone out-
crops, usually in shade of shrubs or small trees; Coryell, Hood, Lampasas, and Johnson cos.;
widespread in TX. Late Mar–May.

Arenaria serpyllifolia L., (with leaves like Thymus serpyllum—thyme), THYME-LEAF SANDWORT.
Plant to 20 cm tall; leaves elliptic or ovate, to 7 mm long, sessile. Sandy roadsides, waste areas, or
stream bottoms; Grayson, Henderson, and Kaufman cos., also Tarrant Co. (Mahler 1988); local,
apparently spreading; naturalized in parts of e 1/2 of TX. Late Mar–May. Native of Europe. I

                                       CERASTIUM CHICKWEED
Small annuals or perennials; petals white, shallowly notched, or petals sometimes absent; cap-
sules cylindrical, exceeding the calyces in age, scarious, with 10 prominent teeth when opened,
the whole suggesting a corolla.

AAn almost cosmopolitan genus of ca. 100 species (Bittrich 1993) including some cultivated
annuals and many weeds. (Greek: cerastes, horned, alluding to the shape of the slender and of-
ten curved fruit)
REFERENCES: Good 1984; Turner 1995d [1996]; Rabeler & Reznicek 1997.

1. Capsule 1–2 times as long as the sepals; petals if present about equaling the sepals (sometimes
   withering very early); sepal pubescence of dense, glandular or non-glandular hairs, these long
   (some ca. 1/3 or more as long as sepal width).
   2. Sepals with long, spreading hairs up to and projecting beyond the apex; upper bracts of inflo-
      rescence entirely herbaceous, without scarious margins; inflorescence or its main divisions
      remaining compact OR open and diffuse.
      3. Inflorescence or its main divisions remaining compact, the pedicels mostly shorter than
         the sepals, 0.5–3(–5) mm long                                                               C. glomeratum
      3. Inflorescence or its main divisions open and diffuse, the pedicels once to twice as long as
         the sepals, 5–12 mm long                                                                 C. brachypetalum
   2. Sepals with subappressed to spreading hairs becoming shorter and stopping just below apex;
      upper bracts of inflorescence with scarious margins; inflorescence open and diffuse in age.
      4. Flowers 8–10 mm wide; petals deeply notched (to 1/2 way to base); sepals pilose, seldom
         glandular-hairy; stamens 10; capsules mostly over 8 mm long; sepals 5–6 mm long in flower;
                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        515




                    Sambucus nigra var. canadensis [BA1, JAA]                               Symphoricarpos orbiculatus [BB2]




Triosteum angustifolium [STE]                       Viburnum rufidulum [SA3]


                                                                                                 Agrostemma githago [GLE]




                                Arenaria benthamii [HEA]                                        Arenaria serpyllifolia [MUE]
516   CARYOPHYLLACEAE/CERASTIUM

         plants perennial, often with non-flowering basal shoots                                          C. fontanum
      4. Flowers 5–6 mm wide; petals shallowly notched (to 1/4 way to base); sepals glandular-
         hairy; stamens 5 (rarely 10); capsules < 8 mm long; sepals 4–5 mm long in flower; plants
         annual                                                                                            C. pumilum
1. Capsule 2–3 times as long as the sepals; petals often 1.5–2 times as long as the sepals; sepal
   pubescence of sparse, glandular hairs, these short (much < 1/3 as long as sepal width).
   5. Leaves usually 30 mm or less long; pedicels straight or only slightly curved at maturity, usually
      equaling or shorter than the capsules in fruit, 0.5–1.25 times the length of the flowering caly-
      ces, to 3 times the calyx length at maturity (ca. 2–13 mm long); widespread in nc TX
                                                                                                      C. brachypodum
   5. Leaves often > 30 mm long; pedicels sharply curved or hooked just below the calyx at matu-
      rity, usually much longer than the capsules in fruit, 1–3 times the length of the flowering
      calyces, to 5 times or more the calyx length at maturity (longer pedicels 10–55 mm long); rare
      if present in nc TX                                                                                     C. nutans

Cerastium brachypetalum Pers., (short-petaled), GRAY CHICKWEED. Annual; stems erect, covered
with long, shiny, mostly non-glandular hairs; leaves spatulate, elliptic, or ovate; tip of pedicel
often bent in fruit. Roadside ditches; a Red River Co. collection (Rabeler 1333) made in April of
1998 is the first report for TX; the species should be expected elsewhere in nc TX. Apr. Native of
Europe. I

Cerastium brachypodum (Engelm. ex A. Gray) B.L. Rob., (short-stalked), SHORT-STALK CHICK-
WEED. Annual; stems erect, glandular-pubescent with hairs spreading at right angles; leaves
glabrous to rather densely viscid-pubescent; pedicels usually 10 mm or less long, reflexed be-
fore and after flowering, erect or ascending in flower and again in mature fruit, not sharply
curved or hooked just below calyx; sepals 3–4.5 mm long; capsule 6–12 mm long. Prairies, dis-
turbed sites; widespread in e 1/2 of TX. Mar–early Apr.

Cerastium fontanum Baumg. subsp. vulgare (Hartm.) Greuter & Burdet, (sp.: pertaining to
springs or fountains; subsp.: common), COMMON MOUSE-EAR. Apparently annual in nc TX,
though perennial farther n (Larsen 1986; R. Rabeler, pers. comm.); leaves oblong-elliptic to lan-
ceolate or oblanceolate. Sandy roadsides, disturbed sites; Denton, Grayson, and Henderson cos.,
also Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); scattered in TX. Apr–May. Native of Europe. [C.
holosteoidesof authors, not Fr., C. triviale Link, C. vulgatumL.] I

Cerastium glomeratum Thuill., (glomerate, clustered). Glandular-pilose annual, erect or with
decumbent stems; leaves orbicular ovate to obovate. Roadsides, disturbed sites; widespread in e
1/2 of TX. Mar–early Apr. Native of Europe. [C. viscosumof authors, not L.] I

Cerastium nutans Raf., (nodding), POWDERHORN CHICKWEED, NODDING CHICKWEED. Erect or de-
cumbent annual; stems finely glandular-pubescent; pedicels 10–55 mm long, sharply curved or
hooked just below calyx. Moist or rich woods, open areas; included based on citation of vegeta-
tional area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); supposedly scattered mostly in e 1/2 of TX; Turner
(1995d [1996]) indicated that he had seen no collections from the state. Apr–Jun.

Cerastium pumilum Curtis, (dwarf), DWARF MOUSE-EAR CHICKWEED, CURTIS’ MOUSE-EAR CHICK-
WEED. Annual resembling a small plant of C. fontanum. Roadside ditches and open disturbed
areas; a Kaufman Co. collection (Reznicek 10336, BRCH, MICH) was the first report for TX
(Rabeler & Reznicek 1997); in April of 1998 the species was found in Cooke, Denton, Fannin,
Grayson, Lamar, and Red River cos. (e.g., Rabeler & Diggs 1321); this is an easily overlooked spe-
cies; it is to be expected in other parts of nc TX and possibly elsewhere in the state. Apr–May.
Native of Europe and sw Asia. I
                                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        517




Cerastium brachypetalum [COS]                   Cerastium brachypodum [BB2]             Cerastium fontanum subsp. vulgare [REE]




                                Cerastium glomeratum [BB2, GLE]




         Cerastium nutans [GR1]                            Cerastium pumilum [COS]                   Dianthus armeria [GLE]
518   CARYOPHYLLACEAE/DIANTHUS

                                     DIANTHUS PINK, CARNATION
Annual to perennial herbs; flowers in ours in dense terminal cymes; calyces with cylindrical
tube, subtended by 2–several, linear or lance-linear bracts; petals 5, long clawed, without a
crown; fruit a capsule.

AA Eurasian to s African genus of ca. 300 species (Bittrich 1993) with many cultivated orna-
mentals including CARNATIONS (D. caryophyllus L., D. 3allwoodii Hort. Allwood); CARNATION
has religious significance extending back beyond the Dark Ages (Baumgardt 1982). The com-
mon name PINK is an old name probably referring to the notched or “pinked” petals (as in
pinking shears). (Greek: dios, Jove, Jupiter, or Zeus, chief of the Greek gods, and anthos, flower;
Jove’s flower or divine flower, from beauty or fragrance of flowers)

1. Leaves 2–8 mm wide, linear; stems usually pubescent to glabrate; plants annual or biennial; cymes-
   dense, but not head-like                                                                              D. armeria
1. Leaves 10–18 mm wide, lanceolate to oblanceolate; stems glabrous; plants perennial; cymes usu-
   ally head-like                                                                                       D. barbatus

Dianthus armeria L., (the Latin name for a kind of Dianthus), DEPTFORD PINK. Plant 20–80 cm
tall, dichotomously branched above; leaves grass-like, olive-green; calyx tube 10–15 mm long,
closely subtended by elongate bracts ca. equaling the tube; petals pink to rosy or purplish, dot-
ted with white, drying purplish, long clawed, the blades 4–5 mm long; capsules dehiscent by 4
valves. Disturbed areas; Grayson and Tarrant cos; in TX apparently only in nc and ne parts of
state; first reported for TX by Lipscomb (1984). May–Aug. Native of Eurasia. I

Dianthus barbatus L., (barbed, bearded), SWEET-WILLIAM. Plant 20–60 cm tall, glabrous; calyx
tube 10–12 mm long; petals whitish to pink, dark red, or spotted. Cultivated and possibly es-
capes; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990) probably
based on a Hunt Co. collection at TAES which is questionably identified as D. barbatus (R.
Rabeler, pers. comm.); in TX apparently only in nc part of state. Jun–Aug. Native of Eurasia. I

                                                 LOEFLINGIA
AA North American and Mediterranean genus of 7 species (Bittrich 1993). (Named for P.
Loefling, 1729–1756, Swedish botanist and explorer)
REFERENCE: Barneby & Twisselmann 1970.

Loeflingia squarrosa Nutt., (with recurved tips), SPREADING LOEFLINGIA. Small, minutely viscid-
pubescent, erect annual to ca. 15 cm tall; stems much branched, the plants often globose in
shape, about as broad as tall; leaves crowded, almost needle-like, 4–6 mm long; flowers incon-
spicuous, axillary, sessile, usually solitary or few together in fascicles; sepals 5, resembling the
leaves; petals absent or minute; capsules slender, 3-valved. Loose, dry sand; Bell, Dallas, Hood,
Parker, and Tarrant (Fort Worth Nature Center) cos.; nearly throughout TX. Late Apr–May. [L.
squarrosa subsp. texana (Hook.) Barneby & Twisselm., L. texana Hook.] Inconspicuous and
more rarely collected than its widespread occurrence would suggest.

                                         MINUARTIA SANDWORT
Annuals or perennials; inflorescences loosely cymose or racemose; petals white, notched at
apex; fruit a capsule opening by 3 valves.

AA genus of ca. 120 species (Bittrich 1993) ranging from the Arctic to Mexico, Ethiopia and
the Himalaya Mts., also 1 species in Chile. Some are cultivated as ornamentals. Previously in-
cluded in Arenaria . (Named for Juan Minuart, 1693–1768, Spanish botanist and pharmacist)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1949d; Maguire 1951; Wofford 1981; Rabeler 1992.
                                                                             PARONYCHIA /CARYOPHYLLACEAE            519

1. Perennials with stiff, almost needle-like leaves, with axillary tufts of smaller leaves; inflorescences
   glabrous                                                                                                M. michauxii
1. Annuals with flat, soft leaves, without axillary tufts of smaller leaves; inflorescences usually glan-
   dular-pubescent (use lens).
   2. Sepals usually elliptic-lanceolate, acute, strongly 3–5 ribbed.
      3. Sepals 5-ribbed; corollas scarcely exceeding the calyces; leaves 1.5 mm or less wide; plants
         usually < 15 cm tall; seeds dull reddish brown                                                        M. patula
      3. Sepals 3-ribbed; corollas conspicuously exceeding the calyces, showy; leaves often 1.5–3
         mm wide; plants often larger (to 30 cm tall); seeds black, shiny                                  M. muscorum
   2. Sepals usually ovate, obtuse, not prominently ribbed                                               M. drummondii

Minuartia drummondii (Shinners) McNeill, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835,
Scottish botanist and collector in North America), DRUMMOND’S SANDWORT. Simple or sparingly
branched annual to ca. 20 cm tall; stems and inflorescences mostly glandular-pubescent;
leaves to 35 mm long, 2–7 mm wide; pedicels 10–25 mm long; flowers in dichotomous racemes,
showy; petals to 15 mm long. Sandy or sandy clay soils, roadsides, fencerows, or waste areas;
Kaufman, Navarro, and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–May.
[Arenaria drummondii Shinners]

Minuartia michauxii (Fenzl) Farw. var. texana (B.L. Rob.) Mattf., (sp.: for André Michaux, 1746–
1803, French botanist and explorer of North America), ROCK SANDWORT. Densely tufted peren-
nial, glabrous; stem leaves rather crowded in basal 1/3–2/3 of plant, to 15 mm long, ca. 0.5 mm
wide; inflorescences loosely cymose, to ca. 30-flowered; pedicels 5–15(–25) mm long; petals 5–8
mm long. Limestone outcrops, rocky areas; Coryell, Hood, Johnson, Lampasas, Parker, and Wise
cos., mainly Grand Prairie, also Grayson Co., also Dallas Co. (Reverchon in 1872), but not found
there recently; nc TX and Edwards Plateau w to Panhandle. Apr–Jun. [Arenaria stricta Michx.
var. texana B.L. Rob., Arenaria texana (B.L. Rob.) Britton]

Minuartia muscorum (Fassett) Rabeler, (mossy). Branched annual similar to but often larger
than M. patula; seeds black, microscopically foveolate (Wofford 1981). Roadsides, stream bot-
toms, often in sandy soils; Delta, Fannin, Hopkins, Hunt, and Kaufman cos.; e TX w to Black-
land Prairie. Apr–May. We are following Rabeler (1992) in recognizing this species; he indicated
there has long been confusion between this species, A. muriculata, and A. patula var. robusta,
all three of which represent the same entity. [Arenaria patula var. robusta (Steyerm.) Maguire,
M. patula var. robusta (Steyerm.) McNeill, Arenaria muriculata McNeill, Minuartia muriculata
(Maguire) McNeill, Stellaria muscorum Fassett]

Minuartia patula (Michx.) Mattf., (spreading), PITCHER SANDWORT. Branched annual; leaves to
40 mm long; inflorescences open cymose, sparingly and minutely glandular-pubescent;
pedicels to 50 mm long; seeds reddish brown, not microscopically foveolate. Damp sandy
ground; Limestone Co.; e TX w to e Blackland Prairie. Mar. [Arenaria patula Michx.]

                            PARONYCHIA NAILWORT, WHITLOW -WORT
Annuals or perennials; scarious stipules usually conspicuous; flowers few or many, in terminal
cymes; sepals 5, cupped or folded at apex; petals absent or essentially so; fruit a 1-seeded utricle.

AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 110 species (Bittrich 1993) including some cultivated ornamen-
tals. This is the largest genus of Caryophyllaceae in TX (13 species—fide Turner 1983). The scaly
appearance of Paronychia species (due to the stipules) caused the plant to be used historically
in the treatment of whitlow, a condition which caused the fingernails to look scaly—this is an
example of the Doctrine of Signatures, an ancient belief that a plant that resembled a portion of
the human body (a sign or signature) gave clues to its use; i.e., was useful in treating an illness of
520   CARYOPHYLLACEAE/PARONYCHIA

the body structure it resembled (Ajilvsgi 1984). (Greek: para , close to, and onyx, nail, alluding to
the original use of the plant to treat whitlow, an inflammation of the finger, especially beneath
the nail)
REFERENCES: Core 1941; Turner 1983, 1995b.

1. Plants annual, arising from a single, usually unbranched taproot; leaves needle-like to oblan-
   ceolate or narrowly elliptic, sometimes flat, from < 1 to 5 mm wide, acuminate, acute, or obtuse (if
   1 mm or less wide then known only from extreme s part of nc TX).
   2. Leaves elliptic to oblanceolate, 2–5 mm wide; e part of nc TX w to Dallas Co.
      3. Calyces (below point where sepals separate) pubescent with hooked hairs; sepals ca. 1.5
         mm long, with prominent, white, scarious margins, dilated into a white hood with a tiny
         awn/horn from back                                                                             P. drummondii
      3. Calyces glabrous or nearly so; sepals 0.8–1.2 mm long, with very narrow or obscure margins,
         not hooded                                                                                         P. fastigiata
   2. Leaves narrowly linear, 1 mm or less wide; extreme s part of nc TX                                 P. lindheimerii
1. Plants perennial, arising from a thickened, often woody base or branched, persistent root-stock;
   leaves needle-like, 1 mm or less wide, acuminate.
   4. Plants with stems minutely pubescent; sepals 2–3 mm long, usually obscurely nerved; calyces
      with pubescence, the hairs longer near base (below point where sepals separate); West Cross
      Timbers w to w TX                                                                                         P. jamesii
   4. Plants glabrous or nearly so; sepals ca. 3 mm long, prominently 3-nerved; calyces glabrous to
      short pubescent but without longer hairs near base; mainly Grand Prairie and Blackland Prairie
                                                                                                              P. virginica
                                                                                                                         a

Paronychia drummondii Torr. & A. Gray, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835,
Scottish botanist and collector in North America), DRUMMOND’S NAILWORT. Annual to 25 cm
tall, branching above into wide-spreading branches, often wider than tall; leaves to 25 mm long
and 2–5 mm wide; sepals red-brown with white margins and apex. The white, apical hoods on
the sepals distinguish this from all other Paronychia species in nc TX . Loose sand; collected at
Dallas by Reverchon, not found there recently (Mahler 1988), also Henderson and Milam cos.
near e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e TX endemic to TX and LA. May–Sep. [P. drummondii
subsp. parviflora Chaudhri]

Paronychia fastigiata (Raf.) Fernald, (with crowded erect branches), CLUSTER-STEM NAILWORT,
FORKED CHICKWEED. Annual to 30 cm tall, branched well above base, low and spreading; leaves
flat, oblanceolate to linear-elliptic, to 15 mm long and 3 mm wide; sepals slightly mucronate. Dry
woods or sandy openings; Dallas Co. (Turner 1983); mainly scattered localities in e TX. Jun-Aug.

Paronychia jamesii Torr. & A. Gray, (for Dr. Edwin James, 1797–1861, American botanical ex-
plorer of the Rocky Mt. area), JAMES’ NAILWORT. Perennial branching from woody base, to ca. 30
cm tall; stems minutely pubescent; leaves gray-green; sepals light yellow, 2–3 mm long includ-
ing the terminal awn-like cusp. Rocky, sandy, open ground; Archer, Clay, and Coleman cos.; ac-
cording to Turner (1983) this species occurs in the w 1/2 of TX w of a line through Clay, Jack,
Palo Pinto, Erath, Comanche, and Brown cos. Jun–Sep. [P. jamesii Torr. & A. Gray var.
praelongifolia Correll]

Paronychia lindheimeri Engelm. ex A. Gray, (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, Ger-
man-born TX collector), LINDHEIMER’S NAILWORT. Annual to 30 cm tall, much branched from near
base; leaves to 15 mm long; calyces short pubescent at base, the sepals 1.7–2 mm long, terminat-
ing in an awn-like cusp. Rocky, sandy, or gravelly areas; Burnet and Williamson cos. (Turner
1983); mainly e Edwards Plateau with isolated stations in e TX and the Trans-Pecos. Jul–Nov. [P.
chorizanthoides Small] Stanford (1976) recognized P. chorizanthoides (endemic to c TX) based
on the following distinctions:
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      521




                                 Loeflingia squarrosa [GR1]                  Minuartia drummondii [HEA]




Dianthus barbatus [GLE ]    Minuartia michauxii var. texana [BB2]            Minuartia muscorum [HEA]




   Minuartia patula [BB2]       Paronychia drummondii [HEA]                   Paronychia fastigiata [BB2]
522   CARYOPHYLLACEAE/PETRORHAGIA

1. Flowers mostly clustered; calyces (including awns) over 2 mm long; plants pubescent or puberu-
   lent; endemic to central Texas                                                                  P. chorizanthoides
1. Flowers mostly solitary and separate; calyces (including awns) usually 2 mm long or less; [plants
   glabrous or at most minutely scabrous]; Edwards Plateau with disjunct stations in east Texas and
   Trans-Pecos                                                                                           P. lindheimerii

Paronychia virginica Spreng., (of Virginia), PARKS’ NAILWORT, BROOM NAILWORT. Perennial branch-
ing from woody base, to 40 cm tall, glabrous; leaves green or yellowish green; sepals yellowish,
greenish yellow to brownish, ca. 3 mm long, with a short cusp. Limestone outcrops; mainly
Blackland Prairie and Grand Prairie sw to Edwards Plateau; according to Turner (1983, 1995b)
this species occurs e of a line through Montague, Jack, Parker, Erath, and Mills cos. Aug–Oct. [P.
parksii Cory, P. virginica Spreng. var. scoparia (Small) Cory]

                                                PETRORHAGIA
AAn Old World genus of 33 species (R. Rabeler, pers. comm.; including Kohlrauschia and
Petrorhagia sensu stricto as recognized by Bittrich 1993) ranging from the Canary Islands and
Mediterranean region to Kashmir. Some are cultivated as ornamentals. (Greek: petros, rock, and
rhagas, chink or fissure, from principal habitat of some species)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1969; Rabeler 1985.

Petrorhagia dubia (Raf.) G. López & Romo., (doubtful), CHILDING-PINK. Erect annual to ca. 90 cm
tall; stem leaves linear, to ca. 5 cm long and 2 mm wide; inflorescences terminal, with conspicu-
ous bracts subtending flowers or clusters; flowers solitary or in several-flowered head-like clus-
ters; calyces 10–13 mm long; petals pink or purplish, 10–14 mm long. Roadsides and fields;
Cooke and Grayson cos., also Limestone Co. (HPC); weedy in e TX, also Hatch et al. (1990) cited
vegetational area 7 (Edwards Plateau); first reported for TX by Shinners (1969) who suggested it
was possibly introduced with Lolium perenne (RYE GRASS) by the Texas Highway Department.
Rabeler (1985) indicated that introduction with Trifolium incarnatum (CRIMSON CLOVER) was
also a possibility. Apr–Jun. Native of the Mediterranean region. [P. velutina (Guss.) P.W. Ball &
Heywood, P. prolifera of TX auth., not (L.) P.W. Ball & Heywood] I

                                         POLYCARPON POLYCARP
AA genus of 18 species, 16 in Europe and the Mediterranean, and 2 in South America (Bittrich
1993). (Greek: poly, many, and carpus, fruit)

Polycarpon tetraphyllum (L.) L., (four-leaved), FOUR-LEAF MANYSEED. Plant small, prostrate, gla-
brous, much-branched, usually annual; stems to ca. 15 cm long; leaves opposite or mostly in
whorls of four, 2–8(–15) mm long, 1–4(–8) mm wide, apically obtuse to rounded, entire,
subsessile or on petioles to 1.2 mm long; stipules scarious, ovate, 1–3 mm long; flowers numer-
ous, in dense cymes; bracts scarious; pedicels 0.5–3 mm long; sepals 5, 1.5–2.5 mm long; petals 5,
white, 0.5–0.8 mm long, oblanceolate; stamens usually 3–5; styles partly united; capsules 3-
valved, many-seeded. Sandy or silty soils, openings; Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez
1997); se and s TX w to Edwards Plateau and n to Post Oak Savannah and s part of nc TX. Mar–
Jul. Native of Europe and the Mediterranean. I

                                            SAGINA PEARLWORT
AA n temperate and tropical mountain genus of ca. 25 species (Bittrich 1993) of usually tufted
herbs. (Latin: sagina, fodder or fattening; previously applied to Spergula which was used as
early forage)
REFERENCES: Crow 1978, 1979.
                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS         523




Paronychia jamesii [BB2,CHA]    Paronychia lindheimeri [HEA]                        Paronychia virginica [BB2]




                                                               Polycarpon tetraphyllum [LAM]




      Petrorhagia dubia [HEA]



                                   Sagina decumbens [BB2]                           Saponaria officinalis [GLE]
524   CARYOPHYLLACEAE/SAPONARIA

Sagina decumbens (Elliott) Torr. & A. Gray, (trailing with tips upright), TRAILING PEARLWORT.
Inconspicuous, small, to ca. 10(–17) cm tall, erect or partly decumbent annual, largely glabrous
or with some glandular hairs above; leaves linear to linear-subulate, 3–15 mm long, very narrow,
< 1 mm wide; flowers axillary and terminal, long pedicelled (pedicels 3–25 mm long); sepals 4–
5, 1.4–2.5 mm long; petals none or 1–5, entire, white, usually slightly shorter than the sepals to
sometimes slightly longer; capsules with 4–5 valves. Sandy open woods, roadsides, disturbed
sites; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Late Mar–
early May.

                             SAPONARIA BOUNCING-BET, SOAPWORT
AA temperate Eurasian genus of ca. 40 species (Bittrich 1993). (Latin: sapo, soap, referring to
the mucilaginous juice of S. officinalisforming a lather with water)

Saponaria officinalis L., (medicinal), BOUNCING-BET, SOAPWORT, FULLER’S-HERB. Erect glabrous pe-
rennial to 30–80(–150) cm tall; leaves 3–10 cm long, 1–5 cm wide, prominently 2–5 nerved; flow-
ers showy; calyx tube 12–20 mm long; calyx lobes ca. 2–5 mm long; petals 5, white or pink;
petal claw prominent, 10–20 mm long; petal blade 8–18 mm long, notched apically; stamens 10;
capsules 10–12 mm long, 4–6 mm wide. Open areas and waste places; Tarrant Co.; also e TX.
Jun–Sep. Native of Europe. Formerly used as a soap substitute, when the rootstocks were beaten
in water (Baumgardt 1982); all parts of the plant contain saponins; toxic and potentially lethal
to livestock but rarely eaten because it is distasteful (Kingsbury 1964; Burlage 1968; Stephens
1980). 9 I

                                     SILENE CATCHFLY, CAMPION
Erect annuals or perennials; flowers in terminal panicles or cymes; calyces tubular to cam-
panulate or funnelform; petals often clawed; fruit in ours a 6-toothed capsule.

AA n hemisphere genus of nearly 700 species (Bittrich 1993) of mostly herbs. A number are
cultivated as ornamentals. (Name adopted by Linnaeus from earlier authors; probably from
mythical Greek Silenus, intoxicated foster father of Bacchus being described as covered with
foam, from sticky secretions of many species)
REFERENCES: Hitchcock & Maguire 1947; Maguire 1950.

1. Middle stem leaves opposite; stem leaves to ca. 15 mm wide; petals usually 5–10 mm long, 2-
   lobed                                                                                             S. antirrhina
1. Middle stem leaves in whorls of 4; stem leaves to ca. 40 mm wide; petals usually 10–20 mm long,
   fimbriately 8–12-lobed                                                                              S. stellata

Silene antirrhina L., (possibly for likeness to Antirrhinum –snapdragon, whose flowers are said
to resemble a snouted dragon; from Greek: Anti, against, opposed to, like, and Rhis, nose or
snout), SLEEPY CATCHFLY. Annual to 1.2 m tall (usually much smaller); leaves linear- or oblong-
lanceolate; flowers small, open only in afternoon and evening; calyx tube 6–9 mm long; calyx
lobes 0.5–1.6 mm long; petals white to partly (back or crown) or wholly rose-lavender or red-
violet, occasionally absent; crown minute or absent. Open woods, prairies, disturbed sites;
throughout much of TX. Late Apr–early Jun. Reported to be poisonous (Burlage 1968). 9

Silene stellata (L.) W.T. Aiton, (starry), WHORLED SILENE, STARRY CAMPION, WIDOW’S-FRILL. Peren-
nial to 1.2 m tall; leaves lanceolate to elliptic or ovate; calyx tube 5–10 mm long; calyx lobes 2–5
mm long; petals large, white, showy, with wide, ragged apex, the claw not well-differentiated
from blade; crown absent. Woods and thickets, sandy or clayey soils; in nc TX known only from
Dallas, Denton, and Grayson cos.; also e TX. Late May–early Jul.
                                                                         SPERGULARIA /CARYOPHYLLACEAE        525

                                     SPERGULARIA SANDSPURRY
Annuals; leaves linear to filiform; stipules scarious; flowers usually numerous in cyme inflores-
cences, pink or whitish, 5-merous; styles 3; capsules 3-valved.

AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 25 species (Bittrich 1993) including a number of halophytes.
(Derived from the name of a related genus, Spergula)
REFERENCE: Rossbach 1940.

1. Plants glabrous; sepals 0.8–1.6 mm long; capsules 1.4–2.6 mm long; inflorescences generally 4–
   7+ times compound                                                                                 S. platensis
1. Plants glandular-pubescent (at least branches of inflorescence); sepals 2.5–5 mm long; capsules
   3–6.5 mm long; inflorescences simple or 1–3+ times compound                                         S. salina

Spergularia platensis (Cambess.) Fenzl, (from the district of the Río de la Plata in South
America). Glabrous low annual often forming mats; leaves thread-like, 1–3 cm long, ca. 1 mm
wide; flowers in loose terminal cymes; stipules triangular, 1.5–3.5 mm long, ca. as long as broad
or a little longer; sepals broadly lanceolate; petals white, small or rarely none; stamens 5. Col-
lected at Dallas by Reverchon in April, 1880, in wet sandy soil, later reported by him as “com-
mon,” but not found there since; also s TX and Edwards Plateau. Native of s South America. I

Spergularia salina J. & K. Presl, (growing in salty places), SALT-MARSH SANDSPURRY, MARSH
SANDSPURRY. Erect or diffuse fleshy annual ca. 5–20 cm tall; leaves linear, 0.8–2.5(–4) cm long, to
1.5 mm wide; stipules conspicuous, membranous, triangular, 2–4 mm long, ca. as long as broad
or a little longer; flowers in leafy bracted cymes, the inflorescences often making up much of
the plant; sepals ovate, exceeding the pink or white petals; stamens 2–5. In brackish or saline
soils; Brown (HPC) and Tarrant (Mahler 1988) cos.; mostly coastal and along the Rio Grande.
Apr–Sep. Native of Europe. [S. marina (L.) Griseb.] I


                     STELLARIA CHICKWEED, STARWORT, STITCHWORT
Ours low annual herbs; stipules absent; flowers solitary or in terminal cymes of usually 3–7, 5-
merous; petals split more than half way to base (corollas thus appearing to be of 10 petals) or
petals absent; stamens 1–10; styles usually 3; capsules dehiscent by 6 valves.

AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 150–200 species (Bittrich 1993) including some cultivated orna-
mentals. The key to species is modified from Rabeler and Reznicek (1997) with additional char-
acters from Morton (1972). We are following Kent (1997) for nomenclature of S. pallida. (Latin:
stella, a star, in allusion to the star-shaped flowers)
REFERENCES: Whitehead & Sinha 1967; Morton 1972; Rabeler 1988; Kent 1997; Rabeler &
Reznicek 1997.

1. Flowers usually open, with white petals; plants green, rarely yellowish green; sepals 3.5–7 mm
   long, uniformly green; seeds dark brown, (0.8–)0.9–1.3 mm in diam., the surface covered with
   wavy, blunt papillae; capsules 4.5–9 mm long; stamens 3–10; anthers red-violet                      S. media
1. Flowers usually cleistogamous, apetalous; plants yellowish green; sepals seldom over 3 mm long,
   often with a red basal band; seeds yellowish brown, 0.5–0.8 mm in diam., the surface covered
   with acute papillae; capsules 3–4 mm long; stamens usually 1–3(–5); anthers gray-violet             S. pallida

Stellaria media (L.) Vill., (intermediate, the middle), TENPETAL, COMMON CHICKWEED, CHICK-
WEED STARWORT. Annual, possibly overwintering in protected places; stems prostrate to ascend-
ing, usually pubescent in lines; lower leaves petioled, upper sessile; leaf blades oblong-lan-
ceolate to ovate-lanceolate, widely tapered to abruptly narrowed at base; sepals 3.5–7 mm long;
petals white, slightly shorter than the sepals, 2-lobed nearly to base and thus appearing as 10
526   CELASTRACEAE

petals; capsules usually pointing downward, equal or exceeding the calyces by 1–2 mm; 2n =
40, 42, 44 (Morton 1972). Widespread weed of stream bottoms, lawns, disturbed sites; nearly
throughout TX. Feb–Apr. Native of Europe. This now cosmopolitan weed is usually autoga-
mous. Reported to cause digestive disorders in sheep (Burlage 1968). 9 I

Stellaria pallida (Dumort.) Crép., (pale), LESSER CHICKWEED. Annual similar to S. media; differ-
ing as described in the key; 2n = 22 (Morton 1972). Disturbed areas, typically in sand; a Hopkins
Co. collection (Reznicek 10361, BRCH, MICH) near the e edge of nc TX is the first report for this
species from TX (Rabeler & Reznicek 1997); in April of 1998 the species was found in Denton
and Grayson cos. (e.g., Rabeler & Diggs 1320);because of its similarity to S. media, this is an eas-
ily overlooked species; it is to be expected in other parts of nc TX and possibly elsewhere in the
state, especially early in the spring. Spring. Native of Europe. [S. media subsp. pallida (Dumort.)
Asch. & Graebn., S. apetala of authors, not Ucria] First documented in North America at Kitty
Hawk, NC in 1969 (Morton 1972). I

                                                  VACCARIA
AA genus of 1 or 4 species (Bittrich 1993) of Eurasia and the Mediterranean. (Latin: vacca, cow,
from use as fodder or prevalence in pastures)

Vaccaria hispanica (Mill.) Rauschert, (Spanish), COWCOCKLE, COWHERB. Erect, glabrous, usually
wide-branched annual to 60 cm tall; leaves ovate- to broadly oblong-lanceolate, auricled-clasp-
ing; flowers in terminal, open cymes, long-pedicelled; calyces tubular in flower, ovoid, inflated
in fruit, sharply 5-angled, the tube 8–14 mm long, the lobes 1.5–3 mm long; petals long-clawed,
lavender-pink, showy; capsules dehiscent by 4 valves. Roadsides and disturbed areas, at mar-
gins of grain fields; also cultivated as an ornamental; Bosque, Collin, Dallas, Denton, Grayson,
Rockwall, and Tarrant cos., also Brown, Erath (Stanford 1976), and Fannin (VDB) cos.; nc TX s to
Edwards Plateau. Late Apr–early Jun. Native of Eurasia and the Mediterranean. [Saponaria
vaccaria L., V. pyramidata Medik.] I


      CELASTRACEAE BITTERSWEET OR STAFFTREE FAMILY
Ours shrubs, small trees, or woody vines; leaves simple, alternate or opposite, deciduous;
stipules minute, falling early; inflorescences terminal or axillary; pedicels jointed; flowers
small, radially symmetrical, 4- or 5-merous, perfect or unisexual; stamens inserted on margin
of a prominent disk; ovary superior; fruit a loculicidal capsule; seeds arillate.

AA medium-large (1,300 species in 88 genera), mainly tropical and subtropical to temperate
family of mostly trees, shrubs, or woody vines; laticifers are usually present. The African Catha
edulis (Vahl) Endl. (KHAT, QAT, CAFTA) is cultivated for the leaves which are chewed by Moslems
as a daily stimulant in countries such as Ethopia, Somalia, and Yemen; in the U.S. it is consid-
ered a controlled substance and was of concern when the U.S. deployed troops to Somalia in
1993 (Baker 1993). (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: shrubs, small trees, or woody vines with simple leaves, small
flowers with a disk beneath or ± surrounding the ovary, and often leathery capsules containing
seeds usually with brightly colored arils.
REFERENCES: Brizicky 1964a; Lundell 1969b.

1. Leaves alternate; twining, high-climbing, woody vine; flowers in terminal racemes or panicles, 5-
   merous                                                                                               Celastrus
1. Leaves opposite; erect shrub or small tree; flowers in axillary cymes, 4-merous                     Evonymus
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        527




Silene antirrhina [BB2, DIL]
                                                                                             Spergularia platensis [HEA]


                                                    Silene stellata [GLE ]




                                                                                Stellaria media [REE]
        Spergularia salina [MOS]




                                   Stellaria pallida [HEA]                                       Vaccaria hispanica [GLE ]
528   CELASTRACEAE/CELASTRUS

                                       CELASTRUS BITTERSWEET
AA genus of 32 species native from the tropics to warm temperate areas; some are cultivated as
ornamentals or used medicinally. (From celastros, an ancient Greek name for some evergreen tree)

Celastrus scandens L., (scandent, climbing), CLIMBING BITTERSWEET, AMERICAN BITTERSWEET.
Twining, climbing shrub/liana to 18 m; main stem to 2.5 cm in diam.; leaves elliptic, ovate to
obovate, 5–11 cm long, 2.5–6 cm wide, serrulate-crenulate; petioles ca. 1–2(–3) cm long; inflores-
cences ca. 3–8 cm long; flowers unisexual, greenish, small, ca. 4–5 mm across; fruits globose, or-
ange or orange-yellow, 3-valved, 6–12 mm in diam.; seeds with conspicuous scarlet to crimson
aril. Woods; native to n U.S. and in TX to mountains of Trans-Pecos, apparently introduced in
Tarrant Co.; cultivated for the colorful fruits and arils. Apr–Jun. Possibly poisonous to humans
and livestock (Kingsbury 1964; Blackwell 1990). 9

                         EVONYMUS SPINDLETREE, STRAWBERRY-BUSH
AA genus of 177 species of evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs native to n temperate areas,
especially Asia; also found in Australia; many are cultivated as ornamentals for their bright
autumn foliage, evergreen leaves, or showy capsules with scarlet to orange, bird-dispersed, aril-
late seeds; 9 the seeds of many species have cardiotoxic glycosides and the leaves, bark, and
seeds of some species are poisonous (Hardin & Arena 1974). The genus is sometimes spelled
Euonymus. (Greek: eu, good, and onoma, name, but used ironically, the plants having had the
bad reputation of poisoning cattle)
REFERENCE: Lundell 1941.

Evonymus atropurpurea Jacq., (dark purple). Erect shrub or small tree to 8 m tall; bark smooth,
gray or green; leaves lanceolate, acute, finely and sharply toothed, with distinct petioles 5–20
mm long; inflorescences pedunculate, of usually 5–19 flowers; flowers perfect, 4-merous, green-
ish purple to dark-red; fruit a pinkish to reddish or purple, usually deeply 4-lobed, smooth cap-
sule ca. 15 mm in diam.; seeds with scarlet aril. Limestone soils, stream bottom woods. Late Apr–
early Jun. This species is the source of wahoo root bark, formerly used medicinally, and a
medicinal resin, called euonymin; euonymin and the fruits are apparently toxic (Duke 1985);
Burlage (1968) reported the plant to be a violent purgative, dangerous to livestock and children,
with symptoms ranging from vomiting to mental symptoms and loss of consciousness. 9

1. Lower surface of leaf blades with persistent pubescence, at least on the veins (use lens); leaf
   blades elliptic to ovate, acute or abruptly short-acuminate                                    var. atropurpurea
1. Lower surface of leaf blades glabrous; leaf blades lanceolate to elliptic, long attenuate at apex
                                                                                                       var. cheatumii

var. atropurpurea, WAHOO, EASTERN WAHOO, BURNING-BUSH, INDIAN ARROW-WOOD, SPINDLETREE.
Cooke, Dallas, Grayson, Kaufman, Lamar, Tarrant, and Wise cos., also Bell and Delta cos. (Little
1976 [1977]); in TX only in nc part of state.

Dvar. cheatumii Lundell, (for E.P. Cheatum, a colleage of C.L. Lundell at Southern Methodist
Univ.), WAHOO. Only known from Dallas Co. (Urbandale); endemic to nc TX. According to
Lundell (1969b), “A local endemic population, the stand of which was decimated by a scale in-
sect in 1944.” We have seen only five sheets of this variety and all of these were collected in the
same area in the period 1940–1944. While we are following Lundell (1969b), Correll and
Johnston (1970), Kartesz (1994), and Jones et al. (1997) in recognizing this variety, it is unknown
if the population still exists and it is not completely clear that it should be given varietal recog-
nition. Lundell (1941) indicated that intermediate forms exist in Dallas Co. E

Evonymusamericana L., (of America), (STRAWBERRY-BUSH, BURSTING-HEART, BROOK EVONYMUS),
                                                                   CERATOPHYLLUM/CERATOPHYLLACEAE           529

with 5-merous flowers, tuberculate capsules, and leaves sessile or nearly so (petioles < 5 mm
long), occurs in e TX just e of nc TX.


               CERATOPHYLLACEAE HORNWORT FAMILY
AA very small cosmopolitan family of 1 genus and 6 species (Les 1997). Ceratophyllum is an
extremely reduced (e.g., no roots) and highly specialized aquatic. Some molecular analyses have
indicated that Ceratophyllum is the sister group of all other angiosperms and suggested the ge-
nus is a vestige of an ancient angiosperm lineage that diverged early from the line leading to
other living angiosperms (Chase et al. 1993; Qiu et al. 1993); a more recent molecular analysis
placed Ceratophyllum as the sister group to the monocots (Soltis et al. 1997). Its unsealed car-
pels, among other distinctive characters, makes the genus anomalous among flowering plants
(Qui et al. 1993). (subclass Magnoliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD : rootless aquatics floating below water’s surface, with
whorled leaves forked into nearly thread-like segments.
REFERENCES: Wood 1959; Les 1988a, 1993, 1997; Endress 1994.

                          CERATOPHYLLUM HORNWORT, COON-TAIL
Perennial, bushy-branched, rootless, aquatic herbs, floating completely submerged; leaves
whorled, sessile, 1–4 times dichotomously forked into nearly thread-like segments; flowers soli-
tary in 1 axil of a whorl, sessile, without perianth but with involucre of 8–12 minute bracts, uni-
sexual, both sexes on the same plant; stamens 4–10; pistil 1; style persistent; ovary superior.

AIn some parts of the world bilharzia-carrying snails and malaria-carrying mosquito larvae
are sheltered by these floating aquatics; they can also choke waterways and disturb operations
of hydroelectric plants; on the positive side, they oxygenate the water and provide cover for
baby fishes. The flowers are water-pollinated (= hydrophilous) with the anthers breaking off
and floating to the surface of the water; the pollen grains are then released at the surface and
slowly sink to the female flowers—pollination thus occurs underwater; technically this type of
pollination is known as hypohydrophily (pollination below the water surface) in contrast to
epihydrophily (pollination at the water surface). Ceratophyllum is one of only two dicot genera
for which hydrophily has been documented; the other is Callitriche in the Callitrichaceae (Cox
1988; Philbrick 1991, 1993; Philbrick & Osborn 1994). When sterile, HORNWORTS are often con-
fused with other aquatics, such as Myriophyllum, Najas, or the algae Chara ; however, they can be
recognized by their forked leaves. (Greek: ceras, a horn, and phyllon, leaf, from stiff leaf divisions)
REFERENCES: Lowden 1978; Godfrey & Wooten 1981; Les 1986a, 1986b, 1988b, 1988c, 1989; Chase
et al. 1993; Qiu et al. 1993; Schneider & Carlquist 1996.

1. Leaves usually forked 1 or 2(–3) times, usually with 2–4 ultimate segments, the segments with 4–
   5 conspicuous, widely spaced teeth on 1 side (the teeth visible to the naked eye); achenes with-
   out spines except at very base                                                                   C. demersum
1. Leaves usually forked 2–4 times, usually with 3–8 ultimate segments, the segments entire or
   obscurely serrate (the teeth not visible to the naked eye); achenes with spines along lateral
   margins and at base                                                                              C. echinatum

Ceratophyllum demersum L., (under water). Leaves 5–12 per whorl, 1–3 cm long, ultimate seg-
ments to ca. 0.5 mm wide, to ca. 1 mm at the teeth; involucral bracts 1–2 mm long; style to ca. 10
mm long; achenes 4–6 mm long. Streams, lakes, and ponds; se and e TX w to Cooke, Dallas,
Fannin, and McLennan cos., also Edwards Plateau. By far the most common of the 2 species in
nc TX. May–Sep. This species reproduces primarily asexually; it grows prolifically and in some
situations can be a serious weed (Les 1997).
530   CHENOPODIACEAE

Ceratophyllum echinatum A. Gray, (prickly). Similar to C. demersum; style to ca. 6 mm long;
achenes 5–7 mm long. Streams, lakes, and ponds; included based on citation of vegetational
area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990) for C. muricatum into which they lumped C. echinatum; no
other nc TX specimens or citations found; mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Summer.
Jones et al. (1997) treated this taxon as C. muricatum Cham. subsp. australe (Griseb.) Les. How-
ever, Les (1997) indicated that C. muricatum is known in North America only from coastal se
United States, while C. echinatum occurs in e TX w to near the edge of nc TX.

      CHENOPODIACEAE GOOSEFOOT OR PIGWEED FAMILY
Ours annual, biennial, or perennial herbs with stems often ± succulent; leaves alternate (rarely
opposite), simple, the blades entire or rather coarsely or irregularly and bluntly toothed or
lobed, often ± succulent; stipules absent; flowers 1–many, glomerate in spikes or panicles of
spikes or axillary, perfect or unisexual, very small; sepals 0–5, green, sometimes with white to
yellowish or pink margins; petals absent; stamens 0–5; pistil 1; ovary usually superior; fruit a 1-
seeded indehiscent or irregularly rupturing urticle.

AA medium-large (1,300 species in 103 genera) cosmopolitan family, especially of desert or
dry areas; most are herbaceous with some shrubs or rarely small trees; many are halophytes (=
capable of living in areas of high salt concentrations) or xerophytes. The family includes food
plants such as Beta vulgaris L. (BEET, SUGAR BEET , and SWISS CHARD), Chenopodium quinoa
Willd. (the Andean crop QUINOA), and Spinacia oleracea L. (SPINACH) as well as a number of
agricultural weeds. They exhibit the unusual, reddish, nitrogen-containing pigments known as
betalains (characteristic of most Caryophyllidae—Cronquist & Thorne 1994) which derive
their name from the genus Beta). Many species have Kranz anatomy and the associated C4 pho-
tosynthetic pathway, an integrated set of anatomical and physiological adaptations for hot dry
conditions. Molecular evidence indicated the family is most closely related to Amaranthaceae
(Downie & Palmer 1994). 9 Kühn (1993) cited references indicating that many weedy
Chenopodiaceae produce allergy-causing pollen that can give rise to asthma and rhinitis. (sub-
class Caryophyllidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs often with ± succulent stems and leaves; leaves usually
alternate, simple; flowers very small, inconspicuous, apetalous, greenish, not subtended by
scarious bracts, often in spikes; filaments separate. Amaranthaceae have similar flowers (e.g.,
very small, lacking petals), but have scarious (= dry, papery), often colored bracts below each
flower and united filaments.
REFERENCES : Standley 1916; Reed 1969a; Kühn 1993; Wilken 1993a; Behkne & Mabry 1994;
Downie & Palmer 1994.

1. Stem leaves petioled or with narrowed, petiolar base; leaf blades usually > 2 mm wide (often
   much greater), not bristle-tipped.
   2. Root greatly thickened, often pinkish or reddish in color; fruits strongly adherent in clusters;
      introduced cultivar (BEETS) that possibly escapes                                                       Beta
   2. Roots not as above; fruits not adherent (but can be in clusters); native and introduced species
      widespread in nc TX.
      3. Flowers all unisexual, the staminate and pistillate often in different inflorescences or in the
         axils of different leaves; pistillate flowers subtended by 2 bracts, these fused 1/2 or more
         their length and enclosing the fruit.
         4. Leaves and stems glabrous, green; leaf blades 4–10 cm long; lower leaves with conspicu-
            ous petioles 10–50 mm long; stigmas 4–5                                                        Spinacia
         4. Leaves and stems (at least when young) covered with scales giving the plant a grayish
            appearance, sometimes glabrate; leaf blades 1–5 cm long; lower leaves often sessile or
            nearly so OR with petioles to 20 mm long; stigmas 2–3                                          Atriplex
                                                                                                                  x
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     531




                                     Celastrus scandens [GR1]




Evonymus atropurpurea var. atropurpurea [SA3]                      Evonymus atropurpurea var. cheatumii [LUN]




                ?              /


      Ceratophyllum demersum [REE]                              Ceratophyllum echinatum [HEA]
532   CHENOPODIACEAE/ATRIPLEX

      3. Flowers generally with both sexes (some can be unisexual); flowers not subtended by 2
          fused bracts; fruit enclosed only by sepals.
          5. Leaf blades various, but usually not arrowhead-shaped; sepals 4–5, ovate-lanceolate or
             oblong-ovate; stamens 3–5 per flower.
             6. Plants with silky or woolly pubescence (sometimes glabrate except around flowers);
                fruiting sepals with a wing running across their backs.
                7. Fruiting sepals each with a separate wing across the back; leaf blades entire; plants
                    not tumbleweed-like                                                                        Kochia
                7. Fruiting sepals not with a separate wing each, rather the calyces with an irregularly
                    lobed but continuous wing going all the way around; leaf blades sinuate-dentate;
                    plants with roundish, tumbleweed-like appearance                                        Cycloloma
             6. Plants with glandular or mealy-appearing pubescence (sometimes glabrate); fruiting
                sepals rounded on back or keeled lengthwise, not winged                                  Chenopodium
          5. Larger leaf blades typically arrowhead-shaped with 2 basal lobes; sepal 1, linear-oblan-
             ceolate or linear-obovate; stamen 1 per flower                                                 Monolepis
1. Stem leaves sessile or clasping, widest at base; leaf blades very narrow (2 mm or less wide), short,
   stiff, bristle-tipped                                                                                       Salsola


                                     ATRIPLEX SALTBUSH, ORACHE
Annual or perennial, monoecious or dioecious herbs or sometimes ± woody; surfaces usually
gray-scurfy, at least when young; leaves alternate or alternate above and opposite below; leaf
blades entire; staminate flowers ebracteate, with 5-parted perianth and 5 stamens; pistillate
flowers subtended by 2 bracteoles, without perianth or perianth of minute squamellae; fruit
enclosed by bracts.

AA genus of ca. 300 species of temperate and warm areas; a number are used as salt-tolerant
forage; many are edible and some were used by Native Americans. The Asian A. hortensis L.
(ORACHE) is widely cultivated for its leaves, which are used like spinach. (Ancient Latin name)
REFERENCES: Hall & Clements 1923; Brown 1956; Freeman et al. 1984; McGregor 1986.

1. Leaf blades widest below middle; fruiting bracts not winged (but sometimes with tubercles or
   appendages), 4–8 mm long, usually not united to apex; plants annual monoecious herbs 0.15–
   0.6 m tall                                                                                         A. argentea
1. Leaf blades usually widest at or beyond middle; fruiting bracts very conspicuously winged length-
   wise, (4–)8–10(–15) mm long, united nearly to apex; plants usually dioecious ± woody perennials
   0.4–1.5(–2.5) m tall                                                                              A. canescens

Atriplex argentea Nutt., (silvery). Annual monoecious herb with a ± globose shape; stems erect,
0.15–0.6 m tall, branched from base; leaves alternate or sometimes opposite below; leaf blades
2–5 cm long, triangular-ovate to rounded-ovate; staminate flowers in upper axils or in short
dense spikes or the staminate and pistillate mixed in axils near middle of the plant; bracts sub-
tending fruits 2–8 mm wide, united at least 1/2 their length, subentire to irregularly laciniate,
not winged but the faces sometimes with appendages or tubercles to 2 mm long. Alkaline ar-
eas; w margin of nc TX w to w TX. Jul–Sep.

1. Upper leaves usually subsessile to petioled, the lowest opposite; margins of leaf blades entire
                                                                                                   subsp. argentea
1. Upper leaves sessile, the lowest alternate; margins of leaf blades entire or irregularly dentate
                                                                                                    subsp. expansa

subsp. argentea. SILVER-SCALE SALTBUSH, SILVER ORACHE. Apparently only to the w of nc TX; in-
                                                                         BETA /CHENOPODIACEAE    533

cluded based on citation of vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), probably based on
a Wichita Co. collection.

subsp. expansa (S. Watson) H.M. Hall & Clem., (expanded), SPREADING SALTBUSH, FOGWEED. Clay
Co. near extreme w margin of nc TX.

Atriplex canescens (Pursh) Nutt., (gray-pubescent), FOUR-WING SALTBUSH, CHAMIZA. Dioecious
(rarely monoecious) perennial herb; stems erect, 0.4–1.5(–2.5) m tall; leaves alternate, sessile or
nearly so; leaf blades 1–5 cm long, linear-spatulate to narrowly oblong, entire, thickish, the up-
per and lower surfaces both gray-scurfy, becoming glabrous; staminate flowers in glomerules in
dense spikes arranged in terminal panicles; pistillate flowers in short axillary spikes; bracts
subtending fruits with prominent longitudinal wings (total of 4 wings per fruit); wings each
ca. 2–9 mm wide. Saline or alkaline soils; Callahan and Shackelford cos., also Brown Co. (HPC);
w margin of nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr–Oct. Native Americans ground the seeds into a “bak-
ing powder” to use in making bread (Powell 1988). Individuals of this species are sexually labile,
i.e., able to change from one sex to the other. Sex change (generally from female to male) is ap-
parently associated with stress such as unusually cold or drought and, “… appears to confer a
survival advantage to the individual” (Freeman et al. 1984). Reported to cause bloat in sheep
(Burlage 1968). 9

                                           BETA BEET
AA genus of 11–13 species of Europe and the Mediterranean region. (Celtic: bett, red, presum-
ably in reference to the betalain pigments)

Beta vulgaris L., (common), BEET, SUGAR BEET, SWISS CHARD. Glabrous annual or biennial; stems
to 0.6–1.2 m tall, green or often red; basal leaves in a rosette, long-petioled, reduced up the stem;
flowers in glomerules, these axillary or in terminal spike-like panicles, perfect; sepals 5; sta-
mens 5; ovary sunken in a disk. Cultivated; included based on reference that it is occasionally
escaped in TX (Correll & Johnston 1970). Spring–fall. Native of s Europe and adjacent areas.
Cultivated since the time of the Assyrians for its edible roots, for the roots as a source of sugar
(up to 20% by weight), and for its edible leaves; the roots have high concentrations of the red
pigments known as betalains (Mabberley 1987); ca. half the world’s sugar supplies are derived
from BEET; a different subspecies (subsp. cicla (L.) Koch), SWISS CHARD, SPINACH BEET, is culti-
vated for the edible leaves (Mabberley 1987; Hyam & Pankhurst 1995). I

              CHENOPODIUM LAMB’S-QUARTERS, GOOSEFOOT, PIGWEED
Weedy annual (rarely biennial or perennial) herbs, some strongly aromatic, often with mealy-
coated or glandular foliage; leaves alternate; flowers crowded in small bunches (= glomerules),
axillary or in terminal panicled spikes, usually perfect; calyces usually white-mealy or glandu-
lar-pubescent outside; petals absent; stamens usually 5; fruit a small urticle with thin pericarp
that is easily separable or firmly attached; because of the thinness of the pericarp, the seed and
fruit are essentially the same size; embryo partly or completely encircling the endosperm.

AA genus of ca. 100 species of mostly weedy herbs of temperate areas; some are cultivated as
“grains,” as ornamentals, or for medicinal uses. Chenopodium quinoa Willd. (QUINUA, QUINOA),
of Andean South America, was an important pre-Colombian “grain” and is currently making a
resurgence; various QUINUA products (e.g., cereals, pastas) are at present widely available in
health food stores; see Wilson (1990) for information on the origin of QUINUA. Chenopodium
species are often difficult to distinguish because of vegetative variability and the small size of
the taxonomically important reproductive characters (e.g., fruits, calyces). Mature fruits are ex-
tremely helpful in identification. Because of the difficulties involved, several species can be
534   CHENOPODIACEAE/CHENOPODIUM

reached more than one way in the key. (Greek: chen, a goose, and pous, foot, in allusion to the
shape of the leaves of some species)
REFERENCES: Aellen & Just 1943; Wahl 1954; Reed 1969a; Crawford 1975; Crawford & Wilson
1986; Dorn 1988.

1. Leaves and inflorescences glandular (the glands stalked or sessile) and often pubescent with
   non-glandular hairs; leaves coarsely toothed or pinnately lobed; plants usually with a strong odor.
   2. Sepals densely glandular, the glands stalked or sessile; leaf blades mostly 4(–4.5) cm or less
      long; rare if present in nc TX.
      3. Leaves conspicuously lobed, the sinuses usually cutting more than 1/2 way to the midrib;
         glands on calyces short-stalked; seeds mostly horizontal within calyces                                 C. botryss
      3. Leaves quite coarsely toothed (2–4 teeth per side) but not deeply lobed; glands on calyces
         sessile; seeds mostly vertical within calyces                                                           C. pumilo
   2. Sepals usually glabrous or inconspicuously glandular; leaf blades mostly (4–)6–15 cm or more
      long; weedy species widespread in nc TX                                                           C. ambrosioides
1. Leaves and inflorescences glabrous or mealy but neither glandular nor pubescent; leaf blades
   entire, dentate, or lobed; plants usually without a strong odor (sometimes with an odor).
   4. Leaf blades linear to oblong, usually less than 15(–18) mm wide, 3 times as long as wide or
      longer.
      5. Leaf blades with 3 or more veins from near base, 4–18 mm wide, typically wider toward the
         middle or base, not of the same width for the whole length of the blade, the sides usually
         not parallel.
         6. Lower surface of leaf blades densely mealy, usually conspicuously whitened; sepals com-
            pletely enclosing the mature fruit; inflorescences usually dense, stout                         C. pratericola
         6. Lower surface of leaf blades glabrous or very sparsely mealy below, green in color; sepals
            barely curling over the margins of the mature fruit; inflorescences usually loose, open,
            slender, and often nodding                                                                 C. standleyanum
      5. Leaf blades 1-veined, usually 1–3(–6) mm wide, of about the same width for the whole
         length of the blade, the sides nearly parallel.
         7. Plants densely mealy; fruits 0.9–1.2 mm in diam.; seeds 0.8–1.1 mm in diam.; calyces open
            in fruit                                                                                    C. leptophyllum
         7. Plants nearly glabrous; fruits 1.3–1.6 mm in diam.; seeds 1.2–1.5 mm in diam.; calyces closed
            in fruit                                                                                         C. pallescens
   4. Leaves ovate, deltoid to rhombic, wider than 15 mm, 1–3 times as long as wide.
      8. Leaf blades ca. as wide as long, 1–3.5 cm long, essentially entire; plants with semi-prostrate
         habit                                                                                                  C. vulvaria
      8. Leaf blades longer than wide, 2–10 (rarely more) cm long, at least the lower often toothed
         at very base; plants with various habits.
         9. Glomerules with mature fruits and flowers simultaneously.
             10. Leaf blades large, 50–150 mm wide, with 1–4, large, conspicuous teeth per side; fruits
              1.5–2.5(–2.7) mm in diam.                                                                         C. simplexx
             10. Leaf blades small, usually 20 mm or less wide (reports up to 50 mm[?]), entire or with
                 a few low teeth; fruits 1–1.5(–1.6) mm in diam.                                       C. standleyanum
         9. Glomerules either flowering or fruiting but usually not both (C. simplex and C. standleyanum
            can also be keyed here).
            11. Leaf blades except uppermost deltoid; seeds (pericarp removed) dull; rare in nc TX               C. murale
            11. Leaf blades ovate to rhombic, gradually reduced upward; seeds (pericarp removed)
                 shiny; including species widespread in nc TX.
                 12. Leaf blades large, 50–150 mm wide, with 1–4 large prominent teeth per side;
                     fruits 1.5–2.5(–2.7) mm in diam.                                                          C. simplex x
                                                                        CHENOPODIUM/CHENOPODIACEAE              535

            12. Leaf blades not as above; fruits up to 1.5 mm in diam.
                13. Pericarp with alveolae giving the fruit surface a “honeycombed” appearance
                    (under a lens or scope); fresh plant with unpleasant odor                        C. berlandierii
                13. Pericarp without alveolae, the fruit surface not “honeycombed” or this not
                    discernable (C. berlandieri can also be reached this way); fresh plant with OR
                    without unpleasant odor.
                    14. Lower surface of leaf blades densely white-mealy.
                        15. Plants flowering ca. 2nd week in Sep.; fruits 0.9–1.2 mm in diam.; in-
                            florescences of small delicate glomerules, typically diffuse and often
                            pendulous at maturity                                                 C. missouriense
                        15. Plants flowering Apr–Sep; fruits 1–1.5 mm in diam.; inflorescences
                            often of relatively large glomerules, usually dense but sometimes
                            diffuse, typically erect to ascending or spreading.
                            16. Sepals broadly keeled; pericarp “honeycombed” (quite clear un-
                                 der dissecting scope); fresh plants with unpleasant odor            C. berlandierii
                            16. Sepals with keel absent or poorly developed; pericarp not “hon-
                                 eycombed”; fresh plants without unpleasant odor                          C. album
                    14. Lower surface of leaf blades not densely white-mealy.
                        17. Sepals sharply keeled, completely enclosing the mature fruit; glom-
                            erules of flowers usually in dense, erect inflorescences; pericarp
                            “honeycombed,” rather adherent to the seed; fresh plants with
                            unpleasant odor                                                          C. berlandierii
                        17. Sepals rounded, not sharply keeled, barely curling over the margins
                            of the mature fruit; glomerules of flowers in open, sometimes nod-
                            ding inflorescences; pericarp not “honeycombed,” easily separable
                            from seed; fresh plants without unpleasant odor                      C. standleyanum

Chenopodium album L., (white), LAMB’S-QUARTERS, PIGWEED. Plant annual, pale-green; stems
erect to 0.6–3 m tall, solitary; lateral branches well-developed, ascending and compacted; nodes
and infructescences without dark pigmentation; leaf blades moderately to densely mealy;
blades of lower leaves 1.5 times as long as wide or longer; flowers in large glomerules in axillary
or terminal, dense, paniculate spikes; sepals densely mealy, enclosing the mature fruit; fruits
1.1–1.5 mm in diam., the pericarp not “honeycombed”; seeds shiny, black. Around old home-
steads and abandoned farms, disturbed areas; Denton Co., also Dallas and Grayson cos. (Reed
1969a); widespread in TX. Apr–Sep. Apparently native of Eurasia. As is the case in the Great
Plains (Crawford & Wilson 1986), this species is probably less abundant in nc TX than gener-
ally assumed because individuals of the similar C. berlandieri are often identified as C. album.
However, the “honeycombed” pericarp of C. berlandieri clearly distinguishes it from C. album.
It was used medicinally by Native Americans and by pioneers as a potherb; however, the plants
may contain toxic quantities of nitrate and oxalic acid; poisoning and death in cattle, horses,
and pigs have been reported (Burlage 1968; Schmutz & Hamilton 1979; Mulligan & Munro
1990). 9 I

Chenopodium ambrosioides L., (resembling Ambrosia—ragweed), MEXICAN-TEA, WORMSEED,
EPAZOTE, SPANISH-TEA, WORMSEED LAMB’S-QUARTERS. Plant annual or perennial, strongly aro-
matic; stems erect or ascending, 0.3–1 m tall; leaf blades densely yellow-glandular to nearly gla-
brous; calyces completely enclosing the fruit; fruits 0.6–1.0 mm in diam.; seeds blackish. Dis-
turbed habitats, sandy soils of woodlands; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards
Plateau. Aug–Nov. Weed and medicinal herb native to tropical America; used as a condiment in
Mexican cooking and as an antiflatulent. An antihelminthic (= agent that expels worms) oil is
obtained from the seeds with the active ingredient being a terpene; the plant has been variously
536   CHENOPODIACEAE/CHENOPODIUM

used medicinally including in the treatment of malaria; the oil is toxic and overdoses have been
fatal to humans and animals (Burlage 1968; Kingsbury 1964; Leung & Foster 1996). 9 I

Chenopodium berlandieri Moq., (for Jean Louis Berlandier, 1805–1851, French botanist who ex-
plored TX, NM, and Mexico, and one of the first botanists to make extensive collections in TX),
PIT-SEED GOOSEFOOT. Plant annual, typically ill-scented; stems erect, 0.4–1.5 m tall; leaf blades
often densely mealy when young, later glabrate, irregularly sinuate-dentate; inflorescences
typically dense, erect, although sometimes more diffuse; sepals densely mealy, completely en-
closing the fruit; seeds 0.8–1.5 mm in diam., shiny, black. Dry disturbed habitats. Jul–Sep.

1. Leaf blades definitely 3-lobed                                                                       var. sinuatum
1. Leaf blades usually not 3-lobed.
   2. Inflorescences leafy; seeds 1.2–1.5 mm in diam.                                                  var. zschackei
   2. Inflorescences sparsely leafy; seeds 0.8–1.3 mm in diam.
      3. Sepals sparsely mealy, the lobes green, white-margined; leaf blades not prominently toothed;
         seeds 1.3 mm in diam.                                                                        var. boscianum
      3. Sepals densely mealy, the lobes uniform in color; leaf blades ± toothed; seeds 0.8–1 mm in
         diam.                                                                                        var. berlandieri

var. berlandieri. Leaf blades 1.2–3 cm long, irregularly sinuate-dentate; sepals strongly keeled.
Brown, Coleman, and Milam cos., also Bell, Denton, Tarrant, and Young cos. (Reed 1969a); wide-
spread in TX.

var. boscianum (Moq.) Wahl, (for its discoverer, Louis Augustin Guillaume Bosc, 1759–1828,
French naturalist). Leaf blades 2–6 cm long, triangular-oblong; tepals slightly keeled. Tarrant
Co. (Ruth 321); also e TX.

var. sinuatum (Murray) Wahl, (wavy-margined). Leaf blades ca. 2.5 cm long; inflorescences
somewhat leafy; tepals with small keel; seeds 1.0–1.3 mm in diam. Palo Pinto Co.; mainly Plains
Country w of nc TX.

var. zschackei (Murray) Murray ex Asch., (for Georg Zschacke, 1867–1937, German botanist).
Leaf blades variable but typically larger than in other varieties; tepals strongly keeled. Brown,
Denton, Grayson, Montague, Shackelford, and Wise cos., also Stephens and Tarrant cos. (Reed
1969a); e TX w to nc TX.

Chenopodium botrys L., (a bunch of grapes), JERUSALEM-OAK, FEATHER-GERANIUM. Annual with
strong, not unpleasant scent; stems erect, 0.2–0.6 m tall, densely glandular-viscid throughout;
sepals densely glandular-pubescent, imperfectly enclosing the fruit; stamens 5; fruits 0.6–0.8
mm in diam.; seeds dull, dark-brown. Disturbed habitats; collected by Reverchon (819) in 1879
(Dallas Co.); apparently otherwise unknown in TX. Jul–Oct. Native to Eurasia. I

Chenopodium leptophyllum (Moq.) Nutt. ex S. Watson, (slender-leaved), SLIM-LEAF GOOSEFOOT,
NARROW-LEAF GOOSEFOOT, NARROW-LEAF LAMB’S-QUARTERS. Annual to ca. 0.9 m tall; leaf blades
1–6 cm long, densely white-mealy; sepals densely white-mealy, barely covering the fruit; fruits
0.9–1.2 mm in diam.; seeds shiny, black. Dry places, slopes; included based on citation of vegeta-
tional area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly w 1/2 of TX. Jun–Sep.

Chenopodium missouriense Aellen, (of Missouri). Annual; stems to ca. 1.5 m tall (often over 1 m),
solitary; lateral branches usually well-developed, spreading, and flexous at maturity; nodes and
infructescences often with dark pigmentation; leaf blades coarsely toothed, those of lower
leaves < 1.5 times as long as wide; inflorescences flexuous and arching, of relatively small, deli-
cate glomerules, usually diffuse, typically pendulous at maturity; sepals slightly mealy, the
keel not well-developed; fruits 0.9–1.2 mm in diam. Disturbed habitats; Dallas, Grayson, Lime-
stone, and Tarrant cos., also McLennan Co. (Reed 1969a); in TX apparently only in nc part of the
                                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       537




Atriplex argentea subsp. argentea [BCM]            Atriplex argentea subsp. expansa [BB1]             Atriplex canescens [POW]




                                     Beta vulgaris [BL2]
                                                                                                    Chenopodium album [REE]




 Chenopodium ambrosioides [FAW]            Chenopodium berlandieri var. boscianum [BB2]           Chenopodium botrys [BB2]
538   CHENOPODIACEAE/CHENOPODIUM

state. Flowering restricted to ca. 2nd week in Sep. This taxon is lumped by some authorities (e.g.,
Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997) with C. album [as C. album var. missouriense (Aellen) Bassett &
Crompton]; however, we are following Reed (1969a), Correll and Johnston (1970), and Crawford
and Wilson (1986) in recognizing it as a separate species.

Chenopodium murale L., (of walls), NETTLE-LEAF GOOSEFOOT, SOWBANE. Annual; stems erect or
decumbent, 0.1–0.6 m long; leaf blades thin, ovate to rhombic-ovate, coarsely sinuate-dentate;
sepals partly covering the fruit; seeds 1.2–1.5 mm in diam., dull, black. Disturbed habitats. Col-
lected “in the streets of Dallas” in Jun 1874 and Jun 1875 by Reverchon; not found there since
(Mahler 1988); widely scattered in TX. Native of Old World. I

Chenopodium pallescens Standl., (rather pale), LIGHT GOOSEFOOT. Annual; stems erect, 0.3–0.6 m
tall; leaf blades linear, 1.5–4 cm long, 1.5–3(–6) mm wide, 1-nerved; petioles 2–5 mm long; flow-
ers in large glomerules; sepals slightly mealy, completely enclosing the fruit; fruits 1.3–1.6 mm
in diam.; seeds shiny, black. Open floodplains; Parker Co. (Mineral Wells State Park, Lipscomb
2393); known from a few scattered localities in TX. Aug–Oct.

Chenopodium pratericola Rydb., (living in meadows or prairies), THICK-LEAF GOOSEFOOT. An-
nual; stems 0.2–0.9 m tall; leaf blades densely mealy beneath; petioles ca. half as long as the
blades; sepal lobes white-margined; sepals completely enclosing the fruit; fruits 1–1.5 mm in
diam.; seeds shiny, black. Stream banks, disturbed sites, sandy soils; Dallas, Denton, Jack, Parker,
Tarrant, and Young cos., also Erath, Grayson, and Palo Pinto cos. (Reed 1969a); widespread
mainly in w 2/3 of TX e to East Cross Timbers. Late May–Oct. [C. desiccatum A. Nelson var.
leptophylloides(Murray) Wahl]

Chenopodium pumilo R. Br., (dwarf), RIDGED GOOSEFOOT. Annual, both glandular and pubes-
cent; stems prostrate to ascending, 0.2–0.4 m long; leaf blades ovate or oblong to lanceolate,
with lower surface conspicuously glandular; petioles ca. 1/2 as long as blades. Waste places; in-
cluded based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. 1990; Reed (1969a)
cited only 1 county in TX; Hatch et al. (1990) cited vegetational areas 1 through 10 [?]; the only
TX specimen we have seen is from Upshur Co. in e TX. Nov. Native of Australia. I

Chenopodium simplex (Torr.) Raf., (simple, unbranched), MAPLE-LEAF GOOSEFOOT, BIG-SEED
GOOSEFOOT. Annual; stems glabrous, erect, 0.6–1.3 m tall; leaf blades with 1–4 large teeth on
each side; panicles open, leafless; sepals partly covering the fruit; fruits 1.5–2.5(–2.7) mm in
diam.; seeds umbonate-lenticular, tapering from raised center to margin, shiny, black. Dis-
turbed woodlands; Bell, Collin, Dallas, and Tarrant cos.; nc TX s and w to w TX. Jun–Aug. [C.
gigantospermumAellen]

Chenopodium standleyanum Aellen, (for Paul Carpenter Standley, 1884–1963, student of floras
of sw U.S., Mexico, and Central America), STANDLEY’S GOOSEFOOT. Annual; stems erect or arched
to 1(–2.5) m long, usually much smaller; leaf blades to 8 cm long, usually 20 mm or less wide
(reports up to 50 mm); inflorescence a slender, often nodding terminal panicle; sepals slightly
mealy; fruits 1–1.5(–1.6) mm in diam.; seeds shiny, black. Disturbed wooded habitats, floodplains;
Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant (Ruth) cos., also Bell and Brown cos. (Reed 1969a); e TX w to nc TX,
also Edwards Plateau.

Chenopodium vulvaria L., (old generic name). Annual with bad odor, strongly white-mealy;
stems erect or ascending, branched at base, 0.1–0.5 m tall; sepals densely mealy, rounded on
back, completely enclosing the fruit; seeds ca. 1 mm in diam., dull, black. Included based on cita-
tion of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); Reed (1969a) indicated that TX
is cited in the literature, but cited no specimens; Hatch et al. (1990) cited vegetational areas 1
through 10 [?]. We have seen no TX specimens. Native of Europe. I
                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      539




Chenopodium leptophyllum [GLE]             Chenopodium missouriense [BAR]                   Chenopodium murale [SMI]




            Chenopodium pallescens [HEA]                                                  Chenopodium pumilo [SM1, STE]
                                                   Chenopodium pratericola [HEA]




   Chenopodium simplex [ST2]                        Chenopodium standleyanum [ST2]              Chenopodium vulvaria [GLE]
540   CHENOPODIACEAE/CYCLOLOMA

                              CYCLOLOMA WINGED-PIGWEED
AA monotypic c and w North American genus. (Greek: cyclos, a circle, and loma, a border or
fringe, from the encircling wing of the calyx)

Cycloloma atriplicifolium (Spreng.) J.M. Coult., (with leaves resembling Atriplex—saltbush),
WINGED-PIGWEED, TUMBLE-RINGWING, PLAINS TUMBLEWEED. Bushy annual 15–100 cm tall and
broad, with habit of a tumbleweed, glabrous or with thin pubescence; leaves sessile or short-
petioled; leaf blades 2–8 cm long, oblong-lanceolate, irregularly sinuately toothed or pinnately
lobed; flowers sessile and rather widely spaced in terminal paniculate spikes, perfect, some pis-
tillate; sepals 5; calyces with a conspicuous wing; stamens 5; styles 2–3. Loose sandy soils, road-
sides and disturbed sites; more common in w part of nc TX; widespread in TX. Jun–Oct. The
seeds were eaten by Native Americans (Mabberley 1987). Used medicinally by Native Ameri-
cans (Hopi) for conditions including fever, rheumatism, and headache (Burlage 1968).

                                  KOCHIA SUMMER-CYPRESS
AA genus of ca. 20 species of w North America and Eurasia (Wilken 1993a); sometimes
lumped into the genus Bassia ( Kühn 1993; Mabberley 1997). (Named for Wilhelm Daniel Joseph
Koch, 1771–1849, German botanist and physician)
REFERENCE: Blackwell et al. 1978.

Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad., (broom-like), MEXICAN FIREWEED, BELVEDERE SUMMER-CYPRESS, SUM-
MER-CYPRESS, MOCK CYPRESS, MEXICAN FIREBUSH. Annual, woolly to glabrate; stems erect, 0.3–2(–4)
m tall, often with reddish or purplish streaking; leaves 2–7(–10) cm long, 0.5–8(–12) mm wide,
linear to lanceolate, ± sessile to petioled; inflorescences dense, leafy, spike-like, some plants with
flowers nearly throughout; flowers mostly perfect, some pistillate; calyces with 5 lobes, each
with a wing; stamens 5; styles 2(–3). Waste places; Grayson Co.; scattered in TX but mainly in
Plains Country to the w of nc TX. Jun–Aug. Native of Eurasia. A cultivated form is sometimes
grown as an ornamental for its purplish red autumn foliage. Considered a weed but high in pro-
tein and readily grazed by livestock; ingestion may, however, cause photosensitization in cattle,
sheep, and horses; reported to contain saponins (Burlage 1968; McGregor 1986). 9 I

                                MONOLEPIS POVERTY-WEED
AA genus of 6 species of n and e Asia, North America, and temperate South America; some
were formerly eaten. (Greek: monos, solitary, and lepsis, scale, from sepal number in most species)

Monolepis nuttalliana (Schult.) Greene, (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-American
botanist), NUTTALL’S MONOLEPIS, POVERTY-WEED. Glabrous or sparsely mealy annual with pros-
trate to erect stems 5–35 cm long; foliage pale green; lower leaves long-petioled; leaf blades
fleshy, 1–6.5 cm long, rhombic or lanceolate, with 1 or few coarse teeth or often a pair of lobes
toward base, giving the leaf an arrowhead shape; flowers axillary, sessile, crowded, in upper
part of stem and branches, mostly perfect or a few pistillate; the single bract-like sepal 1.5–2.5
mm long; styles 2. Stream bottoms, roadsides, disturbed sites; widespread in TX but more com-
mon in the w 1/2 of nc TX and to the w. Mar–May.

                                             SALSOLA
AA cosmopolitan genus of 150 species primarily of coastal or other saline habitats. Nomencla-
ture for Salsola follows Mosyakin (1996). (Latin: salsus, salty, from habitat of some species)
REFERENCES: Beatley 1973; Mosyakin 1996.

Salsola tragus L., (Greek: tragos, a goat), RUSSIAN-THISTLE, TUMBLEWEED. Bushy, glabrous annual
15–100 cm or more tall and broad, with habit of a tumbleweed; stems usually with reddish or
                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   541




Cycloloma atriplicifolium [BB2]




                                               Kochia scoparia [REE]




        Monolepis nuttalliana [BB2]




   Salsola tragus [ REE, USB]                      Spinacia oleracea [HEA]
542   CISTACEAE

purple streaks; leaves filiform, 2–8 cm long, only 1–2 mm wide; flowers in interrupted terminal
spikes, enclosed or subtended by a pair of stiff, spine-pointed bracts 3–8 mm long, perfect; se-
pals 5; stamens 3–5; stigmas 2–3; fruit with a prominently winged apex, 3–6 mm wide includ-
ing wing. Roadsides, disturbed sites; Clay and Jack cos. in West Cross Timbers, also Parker Co.
(R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.), also Grayson Co. in Red River drainage; widespread in w 1/2 of TX.
Jun–Oct. Native of e Europe and Asia that is now a drought resistent agricultural pest in parts
of North America; possibly introduced into the U.S. in South Dakota in 1873 or 1874 in flax seed
imported from Russia (Mosyakin 1996; Tellman 1997); this species rapidly became a noxious
weed in the w U.S. According to Tellman (1997), “The newly built railroad was an ideal vehicle
for spreading tumbleweed throughout the west and the tumbleweed’s early distribution pattern
shows it moving outward along railways and roadways.” [S. australis R. Br., S. kali L. subsp.
tenuifolia Tausch, S. kali L. subsp. tragus (L.) Celak., S. pestifer A. Nelson, S. tragus subsp. iberica
Sennen & Pau] The bushy, roughly globe-shaped plants break off at ground level in late fall; the
whole plant, when blown by the wind, rolls or tumbles across open areas and disperses the
seeds (Kirkpatrick 1992). Reported to contain the alkaloids, salsolidine and salsoline, and to be
poisonous to livestock (Burlage 1968). 9 I

                                       SPINACIA SPINACH
AA genus of 4 species of sw Asia and n Africa. (Latin: spina, spine, referring to spine-tipped
bracts around the fruits)

Spinacia oleracea L., (of the vegetable garden, a potherb used in cooking), SPINACH. Glabrous an-
nual; stems erect, 30–45 cm tall; basal leaves in a rosette, long-petioled, reduced up the stem;
leaf blades oval to triangular-ovate to hastate, entire or sinuate-dentate; flowers usually uni-
sexual; staminate flowers with 4–5 sepals and 4–5 stamens; pistillate flowers without sepals,
subtended by 2 usually spine-tipped bracts that grow together and enclose the fruit; stigmas 4–
5; fruiting bracts 2–4 mm long. Cultivated for the edible leaves; included based on citation of
vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); occasionally escapes throughout TX.
Spring–summer. Native of sw Asia. The tissue contains high levels of oxalic acid which com-
bines with calcium and can cause kidney problems or calcium deficiencies; occasional con-
sumption rarely causes ill effects (Schmutz & Hamilton 1979). 9 I


           CISTACEAE SUN-ROSE OR ROCK-ROSE FAMILY
Ours low perennial herbs; leaves alternate or opposite, sessile, simple, linear to elliptic or oblan-
ceolate, entire; flowers small, terminal or in upper leaf axils, solitary, racemose, or in panicled,
compact clusters; sepals 3, united at base, bractless or with 1–2 narrow bracts [sepals?] attached
on calyx-base (bracts sepal-like in some species, more often resembling reduced upper leaves);
petals 3 or 5, opening in sunshine, lasting for one day only (or flowers cleistogamous); stamens
3–many; pistils 2- to 3-carpellate; ovary superior; fruit a capsule.

AA small (175 species in 8 genera), mainly n temperate and warm area, especially Mediterra-
nean family of shrubs, subshrubs, or herbs; some are important as ornamentals, for example in
rock gardens. Family name from Cistus, ROCK-ROSE, a Mediterranean genus of 17 species of
shrubs. The leaves of some Cistus species exude an aromatic resin, laudanum, used in making
perfumes and formerly in medicines (Woodland 1997). (Greek: kistos, classical name for these
plants) (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: perennial, sometimes stellate-pubescent herbs with simple
entire leaves; petals convolute (= twisted), quickly falling; ovary one-celled, many-seeded, supe-
rior; stamens sometimes numerous.
REFERENCES: Brizicky 1964b; Wilbur 1969.
                                                                                   HELIANTHEMUM/CISTACEAE   543

1. Petals 5 (except in late-appearing cleistogamous flowers), yellow, 4–12 mm long; plants pubes-
   cent with stellate hairs                                                                      Helianthemum
1. Petals 3, usually reddish to purplish (can also vary to yellowish white or greenish), 1.5–3 mm
   long; plants pubescent with simple hairs OR largely glabrous                                          Lechea


                   HELIANTHEMUM SUN-ROSE, ROCK-ROSE, FROSTWEED
Ours perennial herbs with stellate pubescence on stems, leaves, and in inflorescence; leaves al-
ternate; flowers dimorphic; cleistogamous flowers often present, with 3–8 stamens, without
petals; chasmogamous flowers with 15–36 stamens, with 5 conspicuous yellow petals.

AA genus of ca. 110 species native from Europe to the Sahara, ne Africa to c Asia, and North
and South America; a number are cultivated as ornamental shrublets. (Greek: helios, the sun,
and anthemon, flower, the flowers of some tending to open only in bright sunshine)
REFERENCES: Wilbur & Daoud 1964; Daoud & Wilbur 1965.

1. Leaves usually 6–8 mm wide; petals 6–12 mm long; calyces (3–)4–6.6 mm long (3–4.2 mm long
   in cleistogamous flowers); capsules 4–6 mm long, with 12–35 seeds                         H. georgianum
1. Leaves usually < 4(–7) mm wide; petals 4–6.4 mm long; calyces 1–4 mm long (< 2 mm long in
   cleistogamous flowers); capsules 1.3–4 mm long, with 1–6 seeds                        H. rosmarinifolium

Helianthemum georgianum Chapm., (of Georgia), GEORGIA SUN-ROSE, GEORGIA ROCK-ROSE,
HOARY SUN-ROSE. Stems 10–40 cm tall; basal leaves present or absent, similar to stem leaves;
stem leaves elliptic to oblanceolate, 10–28(–35) mm long, usually 6–8 mm wide; pedicels of
chasmogamous flowers 3–15 mm long; pedicels of cleistogamous up to 3(–6) mm long;
chasmogamous sepals 3.6–6.6 mm long; seeds 12–35 per capsule. Sandy open woods, roadsides;
se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Late May–Jun. m/91

Helianthemum rosmarinifolium Pursh, (with leaves like Rosemarinus—rosemary), ROSEMARY
SUN-ROSE. Stems 13–50 cm tall; basal leaves absent; stem leaves linear to narrowly oblanceolate,
5–14 times as long as wide, 2–4(–7) mm wide; pedicels of chasmogamous flowers usually 10–22
mm long; pedicels of cleistogamous up to 3 mm long; seeds 1–6 per capsule. Sandy open woods;
se and e TX w to e Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Mid-May–Jun (cleistogamous flowers
Jun–Jul).

                                              LECHEA PINWEED
Ours perennial herbs lacking stellate pubescence; petals 3, usually reddish to purplish (can be
yellowish white or greenish); stamens (3–)6–15(–25); style absent; seeds 2–6 per fruit.

AA genus of 17 species native to the Americas. (Named for Johan Leche, 1704–1764, Swedish
botanist)
REFERENCES: Hodgdon 1938, 1966; Wilbur & Daoud 1961.

1. Mid-stem leaves linear-lanceolate to almost thread-like, not over 2 mm wide; stems inconspicu-
   ously appressed-pubescent.
   2. Pedicels 2–3 mm long (up to 4 or 5 mm in fruit), widely spreading or reflexed; seeds 6 per fruit
                                                                                              L. san-sabeana
   2. Pedicels 0.5–1.5 mm long (up to 2.5 mm in fruit), ascending or loosely appressed; seeds
      usually 3(–5) per fruit                                                                     L. tenuifolia
1. Mid-stem leaves lanceolate, 3–9 mm wide; stems spreading-pilose                              L. mucronata

Lechea mucronata Raf., (mucronate, pointed), HAIRY PINWEED, PINE PINWEED. Stems usually 30–90
cm tall; flowers few–several in a compact cluster; seeds (2–)3(–4) per fruit. Sandy woods, old fields,
and roadsides; se and e TX w to e Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Jul. [L. villosa Elliott]
544   CLUSIACEAE/HYPERICUM

Lechea san-sabeana (Buckley) Hodgdon, (of San Saba Co., TX), SAN SABA PINWEED, DRUMMOND’S
PINWEED. Similar to L. tenuifolia; stems 15–35 cm tall; flowers spaced apart. Sandy open woods;
Bosque, Brown, Jack, Montague, Parker, Tarrant, and Wise cos., also Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988); se
and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Apr–Jun. E

Lechea tenuifolia Michx., (slender-leaved), NARROW-LEAF PINWEED. Stems 12–40 cm tall; flowers
spaced apart. Sandy woods; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau, also
Trans-Pecos. May–Jul.


        CLUSIACEAE (GUTTIFERAE) ST. JOHN’S-WORT OR
           GARCINIA FAMILY (INCLUDING HYPERICACEAE)
Ours annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs; foliage often pellucid or black punctate/dot-
ted; leaves opposite; leaf blades entire; flowers solitary or in cymose inflorescences, perfect, radi-
ally symmetrical; sepals (2–)4 or 5; petals 4 or 5, free, usually yellow or orange-yellow or in one
rare nc TX species pinkish or reddish; stamens few–numerous, sometimes in groups; pistil 1;
ovary superior; fruit a capsule.

AA medium-large (1,370 species in 45 genera), mainly tropical but also n temperate family of
trees, shrubs, lianas, and herbs usually with yellow or brightly colored resinous sap; a number
of species are important sources of woods, gums, pigments, drugs, oilseeds, and fruits. Garcinia
mangostanaL. (MANGOSTEEN) with delicious arils, and Mammea americana L. (MAMMEY-APPLE)
are well known tropical fruits. The alternate family name, Guttiferae, means “drop-bearing”
and refers to the resinous sap, oil vesicles, glands, and dots seen in many species. Our species are
sometimes treated in the Hypericaceae, a family now generally lumped with the Clusiaceae.
Family name from Clusia, a genus of ca. 145 species of dioecious trees and shrubs of tropical
and warm areas of the Americas; they can be epiphytic or in some cases stranglers with roots
surrounding and damaging the host. (Named for Charles de l’Ecluse (Carolus Clusius), 1526–
1609, of Arras, France, botanist, gardener, and author; he introduced the tulip to the Nether-
lands) (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs or small shrubs with mostly opposite, simple, entire,
dotted (dots visible when leaves are held up to a light) leaves; flowers with 4 or 5 separate color-
ful (yellow to orange-yellow, pinkish, or reddish) petals which often have a slight contortion or
twist; stamens often in bundles, sometimes numerous.
REFERENCES: Adams 1973; Wood & Adams 1976.

1. Petals yellow or orange-yellow; stamens few–numerous, in bundles or not so, without glands at
   base; widespread in nc TX                                                                           Hypericum
1. Petals pinkish or reddish; stamens 9, in 3 bundles of 3, with 3 orange glands at base alternating
   with stamen bundles; on e margin of nc TX                                                           Triadenum


                                     HYPERICUM ST. JOHN’S-WORT
Ours annual or perennial herbs or small shrubs often punctate with resin or oil dots or glands
on leaves or other parts (the dots visible on surfaces or using transmitted light); leaves simple,
sessile; flowers solitary or in dichotomously cymose inflorescences; sepals (2–)4 or 5; petals 4 or
5, yellow or orange-yellow; stamens few–numerous, often in small bunches; ovary 2- to 5-car-
pellate.

AA genus of ca. 370 species of trees, shrubs, and herbs native to temperate regions and tropical
mountains. Many are used as cultivated ornamentals while some have medicinal uses. 9 A
number of Hypericum species, especially H. perforatum, contain hypericin, a reddish, fluores-
cent, multiple-ringed phenolic substance concentrated in the glandular dots on the leaves.
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       545




                                                                                    Lechea mucronata [BB2]




Helianthemum georgianum [HEA]     Helianthemum rosmarinifolium [HEA]

                                                                                     Lechea san-sabeana [EN1]




        Lechea tenuifolia [BB2]         Hypericum crux-andreae [GR1]                Hypericum drummondii [ANO ]
546   CLUSIACEAE/HYPERICUM

When the plant is eaten, hypericin, whose numerous double bonds absorb UV radiation, in-
creases skin sensitivity and can cause photosensitization and consequent dermatitis in light-
skinned livestock; symptoms include swelling, blistering, and lesions as well as more serious
reactions including death. Contact may also cause dermatitis in humans (Muenscher 1951;
Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977; Stephens 1980; Crompton et al. 1988; Turner & Szczawinski 1991).
(Greek: hyper, above, and eikon, picture; some species were hung above pictures to ward off evil
spirits)
REFERENCES: Adams & Robson 1961; Adams 1957, 1962; Robson 1980.

1. Petals 4; sepals 2 or 4 and unequal (2 large and leaf-like, 2 smaller or absent); stamens free, not in
   clusters.
   2. Inner 2 sepals minute or absent; petals ca. 6–10 mm long, to 4(–7) mm wide; styles 2; leaves
      9 mm or less wide; widespread in nc TX                                                             H. hypericoides
   2. Inner 2 sepals smaller than outer but well-developed, 7–14 mm long, to 4 mm wide; petals 10–
      18 mm long, 7–15 mm wide; styles 3–4; leaves (at least some) 9–17(–20) mm wide; e margin of
      nc TX                                                                                             H. crux-andreae
1. Petals 5; sepals 5 and equal; stamens clustered in 3–5 groups OR free, not in clusters.
   3. Sepals densely and conspicuously black gland-dotted (visible under a hand lens); petals con-
      spicuously black dotted over their surfaces; stamens numerous, usually 20 or more; plants
      with perennial roots.
      4. Main stem mostly unbranched, with branches only near the summit; leaves obtuse, rounded,
         or even retuse at apex; sepals 2.5–4 mm long; petals 4–7.5 mm long; styles 2–4 mm long,
         mostly persistent                                                                                 H. punctatum
      4. Main stem mostly with small axillary branches throughout; leaves acute or narrowly obtuse
         at apex; sepals 4–7 mm long; petals 8–14 mm long; styles 6–10 mm long, mostly soon
         withering                                                                               H. pseudomaculatum
   3. Sepals not densely and conspicuously black gland-dotted (can have obscure light-colored
      glands; petals not black dotted or in 1 species with black dots limited to the margins only;
      stamens few (6–20) or numerous; plants annual or perennial.
      5. Leaves flat, 2 mm or more wide (usually much more), usually 3 or more nerved, spreading.
         6. Petals 5–12 mm long, with or without black dots along margins; stamens > 12 per flower;
            ovary and capsule with or without prominent, elongate, yellow-amber oil vesicles visible
            under a hand lens.
            7. Petals usually with black dots along margins, 7–12 mm long; ovary and capsule with
               prominent, elongate, yellow-amber oil vesicles visible under a hand lens; leaves usu-
               ally rather small, 10–15(–25) mm long, 2–5(–11) mm wide                                    H. perforatum
            7. Petals without black dots along margins, 5–9 mm long; ovary and capsule without
               prominent oil vesicles; leaves larger, usually 30–70 mm long, 5–15 mm wide            H. sphaerocarpum
         6. Petals 6 mm or less long, without black dots along margins; stamens 12 or fewer per
            flower; ovary and capsule without prominent oil vesicles visible.
            8. Main stem with scattered spreading branches; middle and upper leaves rounded at
               apex; capsule with rounded end (but tipped by persistent style ca. 1 mm long); bracts
               leaf-like in much of inflorescence                                                            H. mutilum
            8. Main stem unbranched or nearly so; middle and upper leaves usually tapering to apex;
               capsule with pointed end (and tipped by persistent style); bracts reduced, narrow and
               awl-like in much of inflorescence                                                        H. gymnanthum
      5. Leaves subulate (= awl-shaped) or linear, 1.5 mm or less wide, 1-nerved, appressed or strongly
         ascending.
         9. Leaves 6–20 mm long, linear; capsules ovoid, slightly longer than calyces; sepals 3–5 mm
            long                                                                                         H. drummondii
                                                                                HYPERICUM/CLUSIACEAE       547

       9. Leaves < 4 mm long, scale-like; capsules elongate, lance-subulate, much longer than ca-
          lyces; sepals ca. 2 mm long                                                           H. gentianoides

Hypericum crux-andreae (L.) Crantz, (St. Andrew’s cross), ST. PETER’S-WORT. Glabrous, essentially
evergreen, erect or suberect small shrub 30–100 cm tall; upper leaves almost clasping; flowers
axillary or in small clusters, pedicelled, subtended by 2 lanceolate bractlets; sepals 4, the 2
larger sepals 10–15 mm long and ca. as wide, broadly ovate to suborbicular; petals light yellow.
Low woods, pond margins, and other moist areas; Limestone Co. at extreme e edge of nc TX;
mainly se and e TX. Jul–Sep. [Ascyrum stans Michx. ex Willd.]

Hypericum drummondii (Grev. & Hook.) Torr. & A. Gray, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond,
1780–1835, Scottish botanist and collector in North America), NITS-AND-LICE, DRUMMOND’S ST.
JOHN’S-WORT. Erect much branched annual to ca. 80 cm tall; flowers solitary in upper axils; pet-
als orange-yellow, 2.5–4.5 mm long; stamens to ca. 12. Dry sandy or gravelly soils in fields or
open woods; in nc TX either in the Cross Timbers or on the sandy soils at the extreme e margin
of the area; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Jul–Sep.

Hypericum gentianoides (L.) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (resembling Gentiana —gentian),
PINEWEED ST. JOHN’S-WORT, ORANGE-GRASS, PINEWEED. Erect much branched annual to ca. 60 cm
tall; stems and erect branches thread-like and wiry; flowers minute; petals 1.5–4 mm long; sta-
mens few. Dry gravelly or sandy soils; Palo Pinto and Parker cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); se
and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. May–Sep.

Hypericum gymnanthum Engelm. & A. Gray, (naked flower), CLASPING ST. JOHN’S-WORT. Erect
perennial to ca. 90 cm tall; leaves cordate-clasping; petals 3–6 mm long; stamens 10–12. Sandy
soils; included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990);
mainly se and sc TX. Jun–Jul.

Hypericum hypericoides (L.) Crantz, (resembling Hypericum—St. John’s wort; this species was
originally treated in the genus Ascyrum), ST. ANDREW’S-CROSS, ST. PETER’S-WORT. Glabrous, low,
essentially evergreen shrub with punctate leaves; stems erect-ascending to decumbent, 30–
100+ cm tall; flowers axillary, solitary or in small clusters, pedicelled, subtended by 2 narrow
bracteoles; sepals 2 or 4, the 2 larger sepals ovate to elliptic, ca. 5–12(–15) mm long and ca. 3–10
mm broad; petals light yellow. Sandy woods. May–Sep. Often segregated into the genus
Ascyrum. The following two subspecies seem to intergrade.

1. Erect and freely branched above the ground                                             subsp. hypericoides
1. Decumbent with several basal stems                                                       subsp. multicaule

subsp. hypericoides. Se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. [Ascyrum
hypericoides L. var. oblongifolium(Spach) Fernald]

subsp. multicaule (Michx. ex Willd.) Robson, (many-stemmed). Se and e TX w to West Cross
Timbers. [Ascyrum hypericoides L. var. multicaule (Michx. ex Willd.) Fernald]

Hypericum mutilum L., (cut-off, the Linnean type being merely a cut-off fragment of a plant),
DWARF ST. JOHN’S-WORT. Erect annual or perennial to 90 cm tall; leaves clasping basally; flowers
very small; petals ca. 2–3 mm long, light yellow; stamens 6–12, free. Edge of water or other wet
areas; Henderson and Hopkins cos. near e margin of nc TX, also Lamar Co. in Red River drain-
age (Carr 1994); mainly se and e TX and Edwards Plateau. May–Oct.

Hypericum perforatum L., (perforated, having or appearing to have small holes), COMMON ST.
JOHN’S-WORT, KLAMATHWEED, TIPTONWEED, GOATWEED, EOLA-WEED, AMBER, ROSIN-ROSE. Erect,
rhizomatous, branched perennial to 70(–150) cm tall; petals orange-yellow, with black oil dots
usually present along margins, 7–12 mm long; stamens numerous, united below into 3–5
548   CONVOLVULACEAE

groups; capsules with numerous yellow-amber oil vesicles. Roadsides; originally seen in TX
(Lipscomb 1984) between Bowie and Decatur along Hwy 287 (Wise and Montague cos.); now
also in Grayson Co. along Hwy 82, also Tarrant Co.; possibly introduced with CROWN-VETCH by
the Highway Department (Mahler 1988). Jun–Sep. Native of Europe. Eating the plant can cause
photosensitization and consequent dermatitis in light-skinned livestock; contact may also
cause dermatitis in humans—see discussion in generic synopsis. This species is also used me-
dicinally as a possible herbal treatment for depression (Leung & Foster 1996). 9 I

Hypericum pseudomaculatum Bush, (false Hypericum maculatum; maculatum = spotted), FALSE
SPOTTED ST. JOHN’S-WORT. Erect perennial to ca. 80 cm tall; petals conspicuously black-dotted.
Fields; included based on citation of vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly e
TX. May–Jun.

Hypericum punctatum Lam., (dotted), SPOTTED ST. JOHN’S-WORT. Erect perennial to ca. 100 cm
tall; petals pale yellow, streaked with numerous black oil dots; stamens united below into 3–5
groups; capsules ovoid, 4–6 mm long, with numerous yellow-amber oil vesicles. Edges of wood-
lands; Denton, Grayson, Hunt, Lamar, Limestone, and Tarrant cos., e TX w to nc TX. Jun–Jul.
Reported to be poisonous to horses (Burlage 1968). 9

Hypericum sphaerocarpum Michx., (globe- or round-fruited), ROUND -FRUIT ST. JOHN’S-WORT.
Erect perennial; stems 30–60 cm tall from thin woody rhizome; leaves usually 3–7 cm long, 5–15
mm wide, obtuse to acute; sepals 3–5 mm long; stamens numerous, free. Prairies, embankments;
Fannin Co. in Red River drainage and Collin Co. near the Heard Museum; mainly e TX. May–Jul.

                               TRIADENUM ST. JOHN’S-WORT
AA genus of 6–10 species of e Asia and e North America; this disjunct distribution pattern is
discussed under the genera Campsis(Bignoniaceae) and Carya (Juglandaceae). (Greek: tri, three,
and aden, gland, referring to the three large glands alternating with three sets of stamens)

Triadenum walteri (J.G. Gmel.) Gleason, (for Thomas Walter, 1740–1789, British-American bota-
nist and Carolina planter). Perennial herb with rhizomes; stems erect, 40–100 cm tall; leaves 2–
15 cm long, 1–5 cm wide, obtuse or rounded apically; petioles 3–15 mm long; flowers usually in
axillary cymules or solitary; sepals 5; petals 5, 4–7 mm long, pinkish or reddish; filaments fused
1/2–2/3 of their lengths; ovary 3-carpellate; capsules 7–11 mm long. In or on edge of water or in
moist woods; se and e TX w to Milam Co. near extreme e margin of nc TX. Aug–Oct. [Hyperi-
cum walteri J.G. Gmel.]



           CONVOLVULACEAE MORNING-GLORY FAMILY
Ours annual or perennial, herbaceous, some with milky sap; twining and climbing vines or
stems trailing to erect; leaves alternate, simple or palmately compound, entire or lobed or with
few, coarse teeth, exstipulate; flowers perfect, axillary, solitary or few in small cymes (the cymes
head-like in Jacquemontia); calyx lobes or sepals 5; corollas sympetalous, funnelform to cam-
panulate, salverform, or rotate, 5-toothed, -angled, or -lobed; stamens 5, distinct, attached at
base or on tube of corolla; pistil usually 2-carpellate; ovary superior, styles 1–2; fruit a capsule
with usually 1–4 seeds.

AA medium-large family of 55 genera (Austin 1998) and 1,600 species. It is a cosmopolitan
family of herbaceous climbers, lianas, herbs, shrubs, or rarely trees; a number are showy orna-
mentals; Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam. (SWEET-POTATO) is widely cultivated; some are problematic
weeds (e.g., Convolvulus). (subclass Asteridae)
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      549




                                                                                Hypericum hypericoides
Hypericum gentianoides [BB2]   Hypericum gymnanthum [BB2]                       subsp. hypericoides [BB2]




  Hypericum mutilum [BB2]        Hypericum perforatum [REE]

                                                                          Hypericum pseudomaculatum [GLE]




Hypericum punctatum [BB2]      Hypericum sphaerocarpum [BB1]                   Triadenum walteri [BB2]
550   CONVOLVULACEAE/CALYSTEGIA

FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: twining herbs (2 species erect to decumbent) with alternate,
sometimes cordate leaves; sap sometimes milky; corollas often showy, sympetalous, radially
symmetrical, variable in shape but often funnelform to campanulate; ovary superior.
REFERENCES: Wilson 1960c; Austin 1986a, 1990, 1998.

1. Parasitic vines, yellowish brown; leaves absent                                           Cuscuta (see Cuscutaceae)
1. Plants green, chlorophyllous; leaves present.
   2. At least some leaf blades usually kidney-shaped, on petioles longer than the blades; open
      corollas 1.5–7 mm broad; corollas light green or greenish white, deeply lobed, the lobes longer
      than the tube; capsules with 2 distinct lobes                                                         Dichondraa
   2. Leaf blades usually not kidney-shaped, on petioles shorter to longer than the blades; open
      corollas 8–70 mm or more broad; corollas variously colored including white, not deeply lobed;
      capsules without 2 distinct lobes.
      3. Stigmas or stigma lobes 2 or 4 per flower, variously shaped (filiform to linear or oblong- or
         elliptic-flattened) but neither globose nor subglobose; corollas either 25(–30) mm or less
         long OR if longer (in Calystegia) then completely white.
         4. Flowers numerous in a densely crowded, leafy-bracted, head-like inflorescence; sepals
            with conspicuous, long (ca. 2–3 mm), tawny hairs easily visible to the naked eye; corollas
            blue                                                                                         Jacquemontia
         4. Flowers solitary or in 2s or 3s; sepals glabrous to pubescent, but without long hairs con-
            spicuous to the naked eye; corolla color various including blue.
            5. Erect to decumbent herbs with short stems to only 35 cm long; flowers sessile or
               short-pedicelled; pedicels shorter than calyces; corollas rotate to shallowly campanu-
               late, white or pale to deep lavender; stigmas 4 per flower                                    Evolvulus
            5. Vines with elongate stems that can reach 1–2 m in length; flowers on long pedicels or
               peduncles exceeding calyces; corollas funnelform; variously colored including white
               or lavender; stigmas 2 per flower.
               6. Leaves narrowly linear to linear, 1–3 mm wide, entire; corollas white                       Stylisma
               6. Leaves variously shaped but not narrowly linear to linear, much > 3 mm wide, entire
                  to toothed or lobed; corollas white to pink or pink with red eye to white or pink
                  inside, with the outside wholly pinkish or brownish lavender or with broad bands of
                  those colors.
                  7. Calyces ebracteate; corollas 1.2–3 cm long, usually with some color, sometimes all
                     white                                                                                 Convolvulus
                  7. Calyces immediately subtended by 2 large floral bracts; corollas 4–5 cm long, white
                                                                                                            Calystegia
      3. Stigma globose and unlobed OR stigma with 2–3 globose or subglobose lobes; corollas
         usually > 25 mm long (< 25 mm in 2 red-flowered Ipomoea species and in the white-flow-
         ered Ipomoea lacunosa), usually not completely white.
         8. Leaves with 5–7 palmate lobes that are toothed to pinnatifid; corollas white with purple-
            red center                                                                                       Merremia
         8. Leaves not 5–7 palmately lobed with the lobes toothed to pinnatifid; corollas variously
            colored, usually not as above                                                                     Ipomoea


                                  CALYSTEGIA HEDGE-BINDWEED
AA genus of ca. 25 species widespread in the temperate zones (D. Austin, pers. comm.); it in-
cludes cultivated ornamentals and pernicious weeds. (Greek: kalyx, cup, cover, calyx, and stege,
cover, alluding to the two bracts that subtend the flowers and conceal the calyx)
REFERENCES: Brummitt 1965, 1981; Lewis & Oliver 1965; Austin 1986a, 1992; Austin et al. 1997.

Calystegia macounii (Greene) Brummitt, (for John Macoun, who collected the type specimen in
                                                                              CONVOLVULUS/CONVOLVULACEAE              551

1895). Semi-erect or sparsely twining, pubescent, perennial herb; leaf blades 2–6 cm long, 1–5
cm wide, basally cordate to subsagittate, marginally entire; petioles 0.5–40 mm long; flowers
axillary, solitary, on peduncles usually 3–5 cm long; floral bracts 2, enclosing calyces, foliaceous,
strongly inflated, 20–25 mm long, 10–15 mm wide; sepals 10–12 mm long, 5–7 mm wide; corol-
las funnelform, 4–5 cm long, white; style 1. Along a stream bank in limestone area, typically
sandy soils near waterways in open grasslands or openings in woodlands; Cooke Co. (Shinners
13256, BRIT/SMU); otherwise unknown in TX; the presence of C. macounii in TX was only re-
cently recognized (Austin et al. 1997). May–Jun. [Convolvulus interior House, Convolvulus
macounii Greene]

Calystegia sepium (L.) R. Br. subsp. angulata Brummitt, (sp.: growing along hedges; subsp.: angu-
lar), TRAILING HEDGE-BINDWEED , Calystegia sepium (L.) R.Br. subsp. limnophila (Greene)
Brummitt, (swamp-loving), and Calystegia silvatica (Kit.) Griseb. subsp. fraterniflora (Mack. &
Bush) Brummitt, (sp.: pertaining to the woods; subsp.: with brotherly flowers, these sometimes
in pairs), are also known from TX (Hatch et al. 1990; Austin et al. 1997). Because of past confu-
sion involving TX Calystegia taxa and because of the possibility of these additional taxa being
found in nc TX, the following key (from Austin et al. 1997) is included.

1. Leaf sinus quadrate (= nearly square); blade tissues not beginning for 2–5(–10) mm from petiole
   attachment (only vascular tissue near attachment)                                     C. silvatica
                                                                                                    a subsp. fraterniflora
1. Leaf sinus V- or U-shaped; blade tissues beginning at the point of petiole attachment.
   2. Basal lobes of leaf blades with 1–2 small, tooth-like angles; plants normally glabrous or with a
      few trichomes on petioles                                                               C. sepium subsp. angulata
   2. Basal lobes of leaf blades usually rounded; plants normally pubescent on all vegetative parts.
      3. Plants twining throughout; leaf blades narrow (mostly 3:1 length to width ratio)
                                                                                            C. sepium subsp. limnophila
      3. Plants semi-erect or sparsely twining; leaf blades broad (mostly 2:1 length to width ratio)         C. macounii


                                       CONVOLVULUS BINDWEED
Trailing to decumbent or twining perennials; leaves petioled; leaf blades entire, toothed, or lobed,
basally truncate to cordate, hastate, or sagittate; flowers axillary, solitary or in cymes of 2 or 3;
corollas campanulate; style 1; stigmas 2, linear, ± flattened, slightly acute; capsules 1–4-seeded.
AA cosmopolitan, but especially temperate genus of ca. 100 species; some have alkaloids. A
number are cultivated as ornamentals, while others can be pernicious weeds. (Latin: convolvere,
to entwine, in reference to the twining habit of some species)
REFERENCE: Lewis & Oliver 1965.

1. Calyces 3–5 mm long, inconspicuously pubescent or glabrous; corollas merely 5-angled; plants
   sparsely pubescent; leaf blades entire except for basal lobes, ovate to ovate-lanceolate to elliptic,
   often almost as wide as long                                                                              C. arvensis
1. Calyces 6–12 mm long, densely pubescent; corollas with margin having 5 sharp points or projec-
   tions; plants densely gray-pubescent; leaf blades from entire to toothed or deeply lobed, vari-
   ously shaped, usually much longer than wide, sometimes with the main part very long and narrow
                                                                                                            C. equitans

Convolvulus arvensis L., (of fields), POSSESSION-VINE, BINDWEED, FIELD BINDWEED, COMMON BIND-
WEED, CORNBIND. Perennial from deep creeping root, forming extensive beds; stems to 1 m or
more long, decumbent or twining; calyx lobes elliptic-orbicular; corollas white to pink inside,
outside with broad bands or wholly pinkish or brownish lavender, 1.2–2.5 cm long. Roadsides,
disturbed sites, a problematic weed in gardens and difficult to eradicate because of the deep
root; throughout much of TX. May–Jul, less freely later. Native of Eurasia. I
552   CONVOLVULACEAE/DICHONDRA

Convolvulus equitans Benth., (riding a horse, like legs of a rider around a horse), GRAY BINDWEED,
TEXAS BINDWEED. Perennial from taproot, not forming extensive beds; stems to 2 m long, trailing
to decumbent; leaves very variable; calyx lobes auricled basally to not auricled; corollas white,
pink, or pink with red eye, 1.5–3 cm long. Prairies, disturbed areas; nearly throughout TX except
extreme e. May–Oct.

                                       DICHONDRA PONY-FOOT
Small, mat-forming, sparsely pubescent, creeping or trailing perennials rooting at the nodes;
leaves long-petioled; leaf blades orbicular-ovate to reniform, entire or notched at apex; flowers
small, 1–2 per axil, long-pedicelled but pedicels shorter than petioles; corollas with lobes longer
than the tube, light green or greenish white; styles 2, 1 from each of the 2 nearly separate car-
pels; capsules with 2 or 4 seeds.
AA genus of 16 species (D. Austin, pers. comm.) native to tropical and warm areas of the world.
(Greek: di, two or double, and chondros, a grain, from the deeply lobed fruit)
REFERENCES: Tharp & Johnston 1961; Johnston 1963a.

1. Pedicels straight; calyx lobes 2–3 times as long as wide; corollas nearly as long as calyces; wide-
   spread in nc TX                                                                                     D. carolinensis
1. Pedicels abruptly recurved near summit; calyx lobes 1.5–2 times as long as wide; corollas almost
   1/3 longer than calyces; found only in extreme s part of nc TX                                         D. recurvata

Dichondra carolinensis Michx., (of Carolina). Plant to 12 cm high; pedicels during flowering
1/3–2/3 as long as petioles; calyx lobes oblong or oblanceolate, separate nearly to base, slightly
exceeding the corolla. Damp sandy or silty ground, also a common lawn weed; Bell, Dallas,
Denton, and Grayson cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. Apr. [Dichondra repens J.R.
Forst. var. carolinensis (Michx.) Choisy]

Dichondra recurvata Tharp & M.C. Johnst., (curved backward). Plant to 17 cm high; pedicels
during flowering 1/10 to 1/2 as long as petiole; flowering calyces 2.5–3.2 mm long, shorter than
corollas. Roadsides, brushy creekbanks; Mills and Williamson cos., also Bell and Burnet cos.
(Johnston 1963a); s part of nc TX s to c TX; endemic to nc and c TX. E

                                                 EVOLVULUS
Ours small pubescent perennials with several erect to ascending stems from a small woody
base; stems decumbent to erect; leaves sessile, entire, narrowly lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate,
small, 3 cm or less long, 1–8 mm wide; flowers solitary, axillary; corollas 8–18 mm across, rotate
or shallowly campanulate; styles 2, each with 2 branches, the 4 stigmas linear or filiform; cap-
sules 1–4-seeded.
AA genus of 98 species of warm and tropical areas of the Americas; 2 species extend to the
Old World. (Latin: evolvere, to untwist or unroll, alluding to the non-climbing habit compared
with other members of the family)
REFERENCES: Van Ooststroom 1934; Perry 1935.

1. Leaves densely pubescent on both surfaces; corollas pale to deep lavender; sepals lanceolate to
   narrowly lanceolate, 4–5 mm long, spreading pilose                                              E. nuttallianus
1. Leaves glabrous above or nearly so; corollas white; sepals oblong lanceolate, 3–5 mm long, ap-
   pressed pilose                                                                                      E. sericeus

Evolvulus nuttallianus Schult., (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-American botanist),
HAIRY EVOLVULUS, NUTTALL’S EVOLVULUS, SHAGGY EVOLVULUS, DWARF-MORNING-GLORY. Stems 5–
                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS               553




                                              Convolvulus arvensis [NIC , REE]



Calystegia macounii [PAR]




                 Convolvulus equitans [SHI]
                                                                      Dichondra carolinensis [BB2]




         Dichondra recurvata [HEA]               Evolvulus nuttallianus [SM1, STE]
554   CONVOLVULACEAE/IPOMOEA

25 cm long, densely villous. Sandy or rocky limestone soils; nearly throughout TX except ex-
treme e. Apr–Oct. [Evolvulus pilosusNutt.]

Evolvulus sericeus Sw., (silky), SILKY EVOLVULUS . Stems 6–35 cm long, densely villous; leaves
densely pubescent on lower surface in contrast to the upper surface. Sandy, mixed sandy and
gravelly, or rocky limestone soils, on hillsides, roadsides, and in open woods; nearly throughout
TX except extreme e part.

                           IPOMOEA MORNING-GLORY, MOONFLOWER
Ours trailing or twining annual or perennial vines or rarely a shrubby perennial, mostly flow-
ering in summer and fall; leaves petioled; leaf blades variable in shape, often ± cordate at base,
entire to lobed or apparently compound; flowers axillary, solitary or in 2- to ca. 5-flowered cy-
mose inflorescences; corollas funnelform, funnelform-campanulate, or salverform, usually
large and showy, often open for less than 8 hours; style 1; stigma solitary, unlobed, globose or
with 2–3 globose or subglobose lobes; capsules usually with 1–4 seeds.
AA huge genus of ca. 600–700 species (Austin & Huáman 1996) of climbing vines or shrubs
native to tropical and warm temperate regions. Many species are cultivated as ornamentals for
their flowers; some escape and become troublesome weeds; 9 others are toxic and hallucino-
genic due to ergoline alkaloids; a Mexican species was used in religious ceremonies by the Az-
tecs (Schmutz & Hamilton 1979). The genus includes the SWEET-POTATO or YAM as discussed be-
low. According to Strausbaugh and Core (1978), the common name, MORNING-GLORY, is derived
from the tendency of the flowers of some species to open at night or in diffuse light (frequently
in the morning). The rust fungus Coleosporium ipomoeaeBurrill sometimes forms conspicuous
yellow lesions on the leaves of Ipomoea species in nc TX; it is a heterecious rust (= uses more
than one host to complete its life cycle) that also infects Pinus taeda (LOBLOLLY PINE), but it can
survive using only MORNING-GLORIES (J. Hennen, pers. comm.) (Greek: ips, a worm, and homois,
resembling, from the twining habit)
REFERENCES: O’Donell 1959; Jones & Deonier 1965; Austin 1976, 1978, 1988; Woolfe 1992; Bohac et
al. 1995; Austin & Huáman 1996.

1. Corollas red, orange-red, or red with yellow tube (white in some cultivated forms), 2–3.5 cm long,
   salverform, the tube abruptly flared near the summit; stamens exserted—in other words, pro-
   jecting beyond plane of limb (= open face of corolla); corolla limb 2 cm or less wide.
   2. Leaf blades pinnately divided into very narrow, linear, almost thread-like segments ca. as wide
      as the midrib                                                                                      I. quamoclit
   2. Leaf blades entire to angle-toothed, not pinnately divided                                            I. coccinea
1. Corollas variously colored, usually not red, of variable length, often longer than 4 cm long, fun-
   nelform or funnelform-campanulate, the tube gradually expanded from below middle; stamens
   included within corolla, not exserted; corolla limb usually > 2 cm wide (except in the small white-
   flowered I. lacunosa).
   3. Leaves palmately compound with 3–7 leaflets (blades divided to base)                                 I. wrightii
   3. Leaves entire to variously and sometimes deeply divided, but not divided to base (thus not
      compound).
      4. Pedicels and peduncles with reflexed hairs; corollas variable in color but in some light blue
         to blue with white or yellowish center.
         5. Corollas purple or blue-purple to pink or white; sepals 6–17 mm long, lanceolate-elliptic
            or lanceolate-oblong, with slightly narrowed straight tips shorter to slightly longer than
            sepal body, glabrous to pubescent; leaf blades variable but often unlobed                     I. purpurea
         5. Corollas usually light blue to blue with white or yellowish center, sometimes drying pur-
            plish pink (varying to all lavender or in cultivated forms other colors); sepals 12–24 mm
                                                                                     IPOMOEA/CONVOLVULACEAE               555

          long, with very narrow, elongate, usually curved, tail-like tips much longer than ovate
          sepal body, at least the body densely long hirsute; leaf blades variable but usually 3-
          lobed                                                                                               I. hederacea
    4. Pedicels and peduncles with spreading to ascending hairs or glabrous; corollas variable in
       color but neither light blue nor blue with white or yellowish center.
       6. Leaf blades linear-lanceolate to linear, 2–8 mm wide; petioles 1–7 mm long                        I. leptophylla
       6. Leaf blades triangular to cordate-ovate or sagittate, usually wider than 8 mm; petioles
          usually 10–80 mm long.
          7. Corollas white or white with a tinge of pink, 1.6–2(–2.5) cm long                                   I. lacunosa
          7. Corollas white with purple-red center, or pink to purplish, or pink to purplish with
             dark center, or rarely all white, 2.8–8 cm long.
             8. Corollas 5–8 cm long, white (rarely pink) with purple-red center; sepals rounded or
                nearly so at apex; leaf blades ovate-lanceolate to broadly ovate or cordate, entire or
                pandurate (= contracted at sides so as to be fiddle-shaped).
                9. Leaf blades pandurate or not so, 2–9 cm wide, broadly ovate to cordate in outline,
                   cordate to rounded-truncate at base; widespread in nc TX                                   I. pandurata
                9. Leaf blades not pandurate, 1–4 cm wide, narrowly ovate to narrowly ovate-lan-
                   ceolate, rounded to cuneate at base; extremely rare, in nc TX known only from
                   Cooke and Montague cos.                                                               I. shumardiana
             8. Corollas 3–5 cm long, pink to purplish or pink to purplish with dark center or rarely
                all white; sepals pointed at apex; leaf blades ovate to cordate-ovate or nearly trian-
                gular, entire or 3–5-lobed.
                10. Sepals about equal in length; root not tuberous; corollas pink to purplish with
                     dark center or rarely all white; stems not rooting at the nodes; leaf blades ovate
                     to cordate-ovate, entire or 3–5-lobed; native species widespread in nc TX
                                                                                                       I. cordatotriloba
                10. Sepals unequal in length, the outer 3/4–5/6 as long as the inner; root tuberous;
                     corollas pink to purplish; stems rooting at the nodes; leaf blades nearly triangu-
                     lar in outline, usually entire or 3–5-lobed; cultivated plant introduced to nc TX,
                     possibly persisting but unlikely to be found in the wild                                       I. batatas

Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam., (vernacular name for this species from Chibchan-speakers of Co-
lombia; from it is derived the English word potato—Austin 1988), SWEET-POTATO, YAM. Perennial
(but cultivated as an annual) vine, trailing or twining, from soft tuberous root; sepals acumi-
nate; corollas funnelform to funnelform-campanulate, pink to purplish, 4–7 cm long. Widely
cultivated and possibly persisting; included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig.
2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly e TX. May–Sep. Probably native of tropical America, now
widely grown in tropical and warm areas for its edible root; it is cultivated in more than 100
countries (Woolfe 1992) and is especially important in Japan (Mabberley 1987) and China; in
terms of production, SWEET POTATO is the world’s seventh largest food crop (Woolfe 1992; Bohac
et al. 1995). Contreras et al. (1995) gave information about the SWEET POTATO in Mexico. True
YAMS are in the genus Dioscorea (Dioscoreaceae). I

Ipomoea coccinea L., (scarlet), SCARLET-CREEPER, SCARLET MORNING -GLORY, STARGLORY, RED
MORNING-GLORY. Low-climbing annual vine; leaf blades broadly ovate, entire to dentate with 3–
5 teeth; sepals obtuse with a narrow awl-like appendage from just below the apex; corollas sal-
verform, orange-red or red with yellow tube, 2–2.5(–4) cm long, the limb 1.7–1.9 mm wide; sta-
mens exserted, 2.7–3 cm long. Cultivated and escapes; McLennan Co.; otherwise known from
coastal TX and Edwards Plateau. Jul–Nov. Native of se U.S. Austin (1975) considered this species
adapted for pollination by ruby-throated hummingbirds (Archilochus colubris).
556   CONVOLVULACEAE/IPOMOEA

Ipomoea cordatotriloba Dennst., (cordate or heart-shaped and three-lobed). Perennial (but flow-
ering the first year), twining and low-climbing vine from branched root; sepal tips acute or
acuminate; corollas funnelform to funnelform-campanulate, purple-rose with dark eye, rarely
white, 2.8–5.5 cm long. Stream bottoms, fencerows, disturbed sites. Jun–Sep. According to Aus-
tin (1976), the following two varieties occupy different habitats in TX; var. torreyana is found
mainly in prairie and plain areas, while var. tricocarpa is found mainly in deciduous forest;
some intermediates are known where the two habitat types meet.

1. Sepals pubescent or pilose, at least at apex or on margins; leaves and stems glabrous to pilose
                                                                                                var. cordatotriloba
1. Sepals glabrous; leaves and stems glabrous                                                         var. torreyana

var. cordatotriloba, SHARP-POD MORNING-GLORY, WILD MORNING-GLORY, PURPLE MORNING-GLORY,
TIEVINE. Dallas, Hill, Limestone, Parker, and Tarrant cos., also Bell, Ellis, Falls, Grayson, and
Johnson cos. (Austin 1976); se and e TX w to nc TX. [Ipomoea trichocarpa Elliott] m/94

var. torreyana (A. Gray) D.F. Austin, (for John Torrey, 1796–1873, coauthor with Asa Gray of The
Flora of North America), COTTON MORNING-GLORY. Coryell, Parker, and Tarrant cos., also Bell,
Brown, Dallas, Hood, Johnson, Lampasas, McLennan, Mills, Palo Pinto, Somervell, and
Williamson cos. (Austin 1976); se and e TX w to nc TX. [Ipomoea trichocarpa Elliott var.
torreyana (A. Gray) Shinners]

Ipomoea hederacea Jacq., (resembling Hedera —English ivy), IVY-LEAF MORNING-GLORY. Annual
twining vines; stems retrorsely pubescent; leaf blades usually 3-lobed to rarely unlobed or 5-
lobed; sepals with tail-like tips much longer than ovate sepal body, at least the body densely
long hirsute; corollas funnelform, usually light blue or blue with white or yellowish center
(varying to all lavender or in cultivated forms other colors), sometimes drying puplish pink,
2.5–5 cm long. Disturbed areas, roadsides; Bell, Dallas, Grayson, and Rockwall cos.; scattered lo-
calities in TX. Jul–Oct.

Ipomoea lacunosa L., (with air spaces, holes or pits, from the loosely reticulate venation of the
leaves), PITTED MORNING-GLORY, SMALL WHITE MORNING-GLORY, WHITE MORNING-GLORY. Annual
often twining vine from taproot, sparsely to densely hispid-pubescent; leaf blades unlobed or
angulate or lobed; sepals acuminate; corollas funnelform, white or white with a tinge of pink,
1.5–2(–2.5) cm long. Disturbed areas; Dallas and Grayson cos., also Tarrant Co. (Mahler 1988); se
and e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Sep–Oct.

Ipomoea leptophylla Torr., (thin-leaved), BUSH MORNING-GLORY. Perennial herb; stems erect to de-
cumbent, bushy-branched, to ca. 1.2 m tall; leaf blades lanceolate to linear, unlobed; petioles 1–7
mm long; corollas funnelform to funnelform-campanulate, lavender-pink with dark center or
completely purple-red, 5–9 cm long; Clay and Montague cos.; West Cross Timbers s and w to w TX.

Ipomoea pandurata (L.) G. Mey., (fiddle-shaped), BIG-ROOT MORNING-GLORY, WILD POTATO-VINE,
MAN-OF-THE-EARTH, WILD POTATO, WILD SWEET-POTATO, INDIAN-POTATO. Perennial twining or
trailing vine; juice milky; leaf blades cordate-ovate, often fiddle-shaped (= pandurate); sepal
tips obtuse; corollas funnelform, white with purple-red eye, 5–8 cm long. Sandy roadsides and
disturbed ground; Cooke, Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant cos., also Montague Co. (S. Lusk, pers.
comm.) e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Jun–Sep. The starchy, enormously thickened
roots of old plants can weight up to 25 pounds (Wills & Irwin 1961); they were reportedly used
by Native Americans as food; they are also reported to be poisonous, to have a milky resinous
juice, and to contain the glucoside ipomoein (Burlage 1968). 9 m/94

Ipomoea purpurea (L.) Roth, (purple), MEXICAN MORNING-GLORY, WOOLLY MORNING-GLORY, COM-
MON MORNING-GLORY. Annual, low- to high-climbing, twining vine; leaf blades usually unlobed
                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     557




                           Evolvulus sericeus [RUI]




 Ipomoea batatas [BR2]    Ipomoea coccinea [BB2]                      Ipomoea cordatotriloba
                                                                       var. cordatotriloba [BB1]




Ipomoea hederacea [REE]   Ipomoea lacunosa [BB2]                      Ipomoea leptophylla [BB2]
558   CONVOLVULACEAE/JACQUEMONTIA

to rarely 3- or 5-lobed; corollas funnelform, blue-purple to reddish or white (variable in culti-
vated forms), 2.5–5(–7) cm long. Stream banks, disturbed or waste areas; Dallas Co.; mainly w
part of TX. [I. purpurea (L.) Roth var. diversifolia (Lindl.) O’Donell] Reported to be poisonous
(Burlage 1968). 9

Ipomoea quamoclit L., (native Mexican name), CYPRESSVINE. Low-climbing, twining, annual
vine; leaf blades pinnately divided into very narrow, linear, almost thread-like segments about
as wide as the midrib (0.2–1.5 mm wide); corollas salverform, deep red (white in some culti-
vated forms), 2–3 cm long, limb 1.8–2 cm wide; stamens exserted, 2.5–3 cm long. Cultivated and
spreads; Grayson Co.; also Blackland Prairie and Post Oak Savannah. Jul–Nov. Native of se U.S.

Ipomoea shumardiana (Torr.) Shinners, (for Benjamin Franklin Shumard, 1820–1869, state geolo-
gist of TX in 1860), NARROW-LEAF MORNING-GLORY. Perennial vine similar to I. pandurata but
leaf blades often narrower, 3–8 cm long; corollas funnelform, white (rarely pink) with purple-
red throat, 5–8 cm long. Possibly a hybrid between I. leptophylla and I. pandurata (Correll &
Johnston 1970). Gravelly roadside prairie; rare; Montague Co. (S. Lusk s.n., 1997), also Cooke Co.
(Correll & Johnston 1970); also Edwards Plateau; endemic of TX, OK, and KS. Jun–Aug. The re-
cent Montague Co. collections are the only ones known from nc TX for many decades. [Convol-
vulus shumardianus Torrey, I. carletoni Holz.]

Ipomoea wrightii A. Gray, (for Charles Wright, 1811–1885, TX collector), WRIGHT’S MORNING-
GLORY. Low climbing vine with palmately compound leaves. Alluvial or damp soils; Grayson
(Hagerman Nat. Wildlife Refuge) and Rockwall cos.; mainly c and s TX. Jun–Oct. Native prob-
ably of India. I

                                       JACQUEMONTIA
AA genus of 80–100 species of tropical and warm areas, especially the Americas; some are
cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for Victor Jacquemont, 1801–1832, botanical explorer)

Jacquemontia tamnifolia (L.) Griseb., (with leaves resembling Tamnus of Dioscoreaceae), HAIRY
CLUSTERVINE. Annual; stems twining, to 2 m long, but can flower while still small and erect;
leaves long-petioled; leaf blades ovate-elliptic to ovate, 3–12 cm long, 2–9 cm wide, the larger
ones basally cordate, acute to acuminate at apex; flowers many, densely arranged in a leafy-
bracted, pedunculate, head-like inflorescence; peduncles shorter to longer than leaves; bracts
and sepals with conspicuous long hairs; bracts lanceolate to elliptic; sepals lance-linear; corol-
las 12–16 mm long, blue; style 1; stigmas 2, ± flattened; capsules 4-seeded. Cultivated, escaped in
Dallas Co.; native to se and e TX. Jul–Oct. [Ipomoea tamnifoliaL., Thyella tamnifolia (L.) Raf.]

                                           MERREMIA
AA primarily tropical genus of ca. 70 species including some that are serious weeds in planta-
tions; others are cultivated as ornamentals or used medicinally. (Named for Blasius Merrem,
died 1824, German naturalist)

Merremia dissecta (Jacq.) Hallier f., (dissected, deeply cut), ALAMO-VINE, CORREHUELA DE LAS
DOCE. Low-climbing to trailing perennial vine; leaf blades palmately deeply 5- or 7-lobed, 4–15 cm
long, ca. as wide, the lobes toothed to pinnatifid, obtuse; peduncles 1–2-flowered; corollas white
with purple-red center, 3.5–5 cm long. Open and disturbed areas, banks of stream; included
based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); c TX, native at least
as far n as Travis Co. May–Nov. Sometimes lumped into the genus Ipomoea [as I. sinuata Ortega].

                                    STYLISMA BONAMIA
AA genus of 6 species native to s and e U.S. (Derivation of generic name unexplained by origi-
                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS            559




                 Ipomoea pandurata [BB2]                             Ipomoea purpurea [REE]




        Ipomoea quamoclit [LAM]                 Ipomoea shumardiana [USH]                  Ipomoea wrightii [WIG ]




Jacquemontia tamnifolia [DIL]              Merremia dissecta [BR2]                  Stylisma pickeringii var. pattersonii [BB2]
560   CORNACEAE/CORNUS

nal author, but possibly from Greek: stylus, a pillar, stake, or column, in reference to the style)
REFERENCES: Fernald & Schubert 1949; Shinners 1962a; Myint 1966; Lewis 1971.

Stylisma pickeringii (Torr. ex M.A. Curtis) A. Gray var. pattersonii (Fernald & B.G. Schub.) Myint,
(sp.: for Charles Pickering, 1805–1878, botanist and physician on Wilkes expedition in the Co-
lumbia River area; var.: for Harry Norton Patterson, 1853–1919, American printer, botanist, and
explorer), BIG-POD BONAMIA. Vine-like, pubescent, perennial herb with long, prostrate or trailing
to ascending stems to 2 m long; leaves sessile or nearly so; leaf blades entire, narrowly linear to
linear, 1–3 mm wide; flowers 1–3(–5) together, on short pedicels at tips of long axillary pe-
duncles; peduncles with leafy bracteoles at tip; bracteoles 1.5–2.5 cm long; sepals hoary pubes-
cent on back; corollas white, 10–18 mm long, funnelform to campanulate; filaments glabrous or
nearly so; styles 2, fused nearly to base of the capitate stigmas; capsules with 1–2 seeds. Sandy
open woods; Parker and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX. May–Aug. [Breweria pickeringii (Torr.
ex M.A. Curtis) A. Gray var. pattersonii Fernald & B.G. Schub.]

Hatch et al. (1990) cited 2 additional species, S. aquatica (Walter) Raf. (growing in or near wa-
ter) (PURPLE BONAMIA) and S. villosa (Nash) House (covered with soft hairs) (HAIRY BONAMIA), for
vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2); both of these apparently occur only to the s and e of nc TX. Stylisma
aquatica can be distinguished by its filaments glabrous or nearly so, lavender corollas, and
styles divided halfway or more; S. villosa has filaments densely spreading-pilose in lower part,
sepals pilose on the back, and white corollas. Another species, S. humistrata (Walter) Chapm.,
(stretched out on the ground), extends up the Sabine River to Wood Co. just e of nc TX. It has
peduncles only minutely bracted, the elliptic-oblong leaves short-petioled, filaments densely
spreading-pilose in lower part, sepals glabrous on the back, and white corollas.


                      CORNACEAE DOGWOOD FAMILY
AA small (90 species in 12 genera—Mabberley 1987), mainly n temperate family rare in the
tropics and subtropics; most are trees and shrubs or rarely rhizomatous herbs; several are culti-
vated including the ornamentally important genus Cornus (DOGWOOD). The Nyssaceae, here
recognized as a distinct family, is sometimes lumped into the Cornaceae (e.g., Burckhalter 1992;
Mabberley 1997). Recent molecular analyses (Xiang et al. 1993, 1998) suggest that Cornus,
Nyssaceae, Hydrangaceae, and Loasaceae, as well as several other groups, form a “cornaceous
clade”; however, they do not support the lumping of Nyssaceae into Cornaceae. (subclass
Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: shrubs or small trees with opposite simple leaves with arcu-
ate veins (= pinnate veins arching toward leaf tip) and small 4-merous flowers in open terminal
inflorescences or in some cases in heads subtended by showy bracts; inferior ovary developing
into a drupe fruit. The “Cornus test” discussed below is also distinctive.
REFERENCES: Coulter & Evans 1890; Rickett 1945a; Ferguson 1966c; Ziang et al. 1998.

                              CORNUS DOGWOOD, CORNEL
Ours shrubs or small trees; leaves opposite, short-petioled, simple, entire, with prominent pin-
nate veins arching toward the leaf tip; flowers very small, perfect, in open inflorescences or
conspicuously bracteate heads terminal on branches or branchlets; calyx lobes or sepals 4; pet-
als 4, creamy white or yellow-green; stamens 4; filaments longer than the anthers; pistil 1; ovary
inferior; fruit a small drupe.
AA genus of ca. 65 species of trees, shrubs, and rhizomatous herbs native mainly to n temper-
ate areas with a few taxa in South America and Africa. A number of Cornus species are widely
cultivated for the showy, bract-surrounded inflorescences that resemble individual flowers. An
                                                                                        CRASSULACEAE       561

interesting field character which can be used to identify Cornus species is the “Cornus test”—if a
leaf is very gently torn into 2 pieces (apical part separated from basal), the primary veins re-
main connected by delicate whitish threads which represent the slinky-like, unraveled, spiral
thickenings of the vascular tissue (Zomlefer 1994). (Latin: cornu, a horn, alluding to the hard-
ness of the wood, the European C. sanguinea L. having long been used for skewers by butchers,
whence SKEWERWOOD in English provinces and DAGWOOD from the old English: dagge, a dag-
ger or sharp pointed object)
REFERENCES: Wilson 1964 [1965]; Ferguson 1966a, 1966b; Eyde 1987; Xiang et al. 1993, 1996 [1997].

1. Flowers in open inflorescences, with no large bracts; petals creamy white; fruits white     C. drummondii
1. Flowers in small compact inflorescences (heads) subtended by 4 large (to 5 cm long and 3 cm
   wide), white (rarely pink), petal-like bracts; petals yellow-green; fruits usually red            C. florida

Cornus drummondii C.A. Mey., (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish bota-
nist and collector in North America), ROUGH-LEAF DOGWOOD. Shrub or bushy small tree to ca. 5
m tall; twigs sometimes reddish; leaf blades pale and densely spreading pubescent or less often
appressed pubescent beneath; calyx lobes shorter than the tube; petals 3.5–5.5 mm long. Stream
banks, hillsides, woodlands, and thickets; e 1/2 of TX. May. [C. priceae Small] During the winter,
the naked reddish twigs are often conspicuous.

Cornus florida L., (free flowering, producing abundant flowers), FLOWERING DOGWOOD , EAST-
ERN DOGWOOD. Small tree with wide-spreading branches, to ca. 12 m tall; young branches usu-
ally greenish but sometimes reddish; leaf blades glabrous or silky-pubescent beneath, often
scarlet in fall; inflorescence resembling a large 4-petaled flower. Wooded areas; Cooke, Grayson,
Fannin, and Lamar cos. in Red River drainage, also Limestone Co. (J. Stanford, pers. comm.) and
reported by Mrs. Stillwell from one Dallas locality (Mahler 1988); common in sandy woods in e
TX to the e of nc TX; mainly e and c TX. This native understory species is widely cultivated as
an ornamental. Late Mar–Apr. Dogwood anthracnose, a fungal disease caused by a member of
the genus Discula, is currently damaging FLOWERING DOGWOODS in the e U.S. (Mielke &
Daughtrey 1990). The wood is extremely shock resistant and was therefore widely used histori-
cally for applications including golf club heads, chisel handles, and the shuttles used in the tex-
tile industry (Peattie 1948). The fruits are bird-dispersed and have a high lipid content (up to
35% dry weight) which makes them particularly attractive to migratory birds which have high
energy demands (Stiles 1984).


                    CRASSULACEAE STONECROP, ORPINE
                                 OR SUCCULENT FAMILY
Ours annual or perennial, often succulent herbs; leaves alternate, opposite, or whorled, simple,
entire, slightly to very thick and fleshy; stipules absent; flowers axillary or usually terminal,
solitary or in 1-sided racemes or in cymes; sepals 3–5(–7); petals 0–5; stamens 3–10; pistils 3–5(–
7); ovaries superior; fruit a follicle or capsule.
AA medium-large (1,100 species in 33 genera) nearly cosmopolitan, especially s African fam-
ily of usually succulent shrubs, herbs, and treelets with crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM
photosynthesis—allows night absorption and storage of CO2 thereby reducing water loss
through transpiration during the day). A number are cultivated as ornamentals including spe-
cies of Crassula (e.g., JADE PLANT), Echeveria, Kalanchoe (MOTHER-OF-THOUSANDS), and Sedum
(STONECROPS). Crassulaceae show similarities to Saxifragaceae and the two families are thought
by some to be related (e.g., Heywood 1993). (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: often succulent herbs (Penthorum not succulent) with radi-
ally symmetrical flowers with separate petals and usually separate (at least above) carpels of
562   CRASSULACEAE/CRASSULA

the same number as the sepals. The somewhat similar Saxifragaceae are not succulent and
typically have fused carpels fewer in number than sepals.
REFERENCES: Britton & Rose 1905; Spongberg 1978.

1. Leaves 5–15 cm long, lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, serrate, alternate, scattered along the stem;
   plants upright perennials to 80 cm tall; petals absent or inconspicuous                                  Penthorum
1. Leaves 2.5 cm or less long, linear to linear-oblong, entire, opposite OR if alternate, then crowded;
   plants small annuals to 30 cm tall (usually less); petals present, often conspicuous.
   2. Flowers minute, < 2 mm across, axillary, solitary, white to greenish white (rarely pinkish); leaves
      opposite; stamens as many as calyx segments                                                             Crassula
   2. Flowers ca. 7–12 mm across, in terminal raceme-like cymes, yellow, white, pink, or lavender;
      leaves alternate; stamens twice as many as calyx segments                                                Sedum


                                                    CRASSULA
AA nearly cosmopolitan, but especially tropical and s African genus of ca. 200 species of suc-
culent herbs, shrubs, and treelets including many cultivated ornamentals; many have
xeromorphic features. (Diminutive of Latin: crassus, thick, alluding to the succulent texture)
REFERENCES: Cody 1954; Tölkin 1977.

Crassula aquatica (L.) Schönl., (growing in or near water), WATER PIGMYWEED. Inconspicuous,
glabrous, green or reddish, moisture-loving annual with decumbent to erect stems to 10 cm
long; leaves opposite, linear to linear-oblong, to ca. 7 mm long, with united bases; flowers 3–4-
merous; some pedicels exceeding the leaves; follicles ca. 1.5–2 mm long. Damp bare spots, pond
margins, pathways, mudflats, sandy soils; collected by Reverchon in Dallas Co., also Navarro
Co.; probably often overlooked; mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–Apr. Sometimes
put in the genus Tillaea [as T. aquatica L.]. Relatively long-pedicelled plants, such as those in nc
TX, are sometimes segregated as C. drummondii (Torr. & A. Gray) Fedde (e.g., Kartesz 1994),
leaving those with sessile or short pedicellate flowers in C. aquatica; we are following Correll
and Johnston (1970) and Hatch et al. (1990) in lumping [C. drummondii] into Crassula aquatica .

                                  PENTHORUM DITCH-STONECROP
AA genus of 1–3 species of e and se Asia and e North America; this disjunct distribution pat-
tern is discussed under the genera Campsis (Bignoniaceae) and Carya (Juglandaceae).
Penthorum is sometimes put into the Saxifragaceae; other authors have separated it into its
own family the Penthoraceae. (Greek: pente, five, and horos, a mark, from the often symmetri-
cally 5-parted flower)

Penthorum sedoides L., (resembling Sedum—stonecrop). Rhizomatous and stoloniferous, largely
glabrous, succulent, perennial herb to 80 cm tall; leaves alternate, short-petioled or sessile; leaf
blades lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, 50–100(–150) mm long, sharply toothed; flowers yellow-
ish green, in curved, 1-sided, spike-like, panicled cymes; sepals usually 5(–7); petals usually ab-
sent or inconspicuous; stamens 10; pistils 5(–7), united below; fruit a 5-angled capsule. Stream
bottom thickets or damp open ground; Dallas, Fannin, Grayson, Henderson, Hunt, Lamar, and
Tarrant (Fort Worth Nature Center) cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX. Jul–Sep.

                                      SEDUM STONECROP, ORPINE
Ours glabrous annuals; leaves alternate, crowded, terete or nearly so; sepals and petals 4–5; sta-
mens 8–10; pistils 4–5; fruit a dry, many-seeded follicle with tapered beak. (Classical Latin name
for several succulent plants, from sedo, to sit, alluding to the manner in which many species af-
fix themselves to rocks or walls)
                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   563




Cornus drummondii [GLE]               Cornus florida [SA3]




         Crassula aquatica [MAS]       Penthorum sedoides [CO 1]




      Sedum nuttallianum [BB2]         Sedum pulchellum [BB2]
564   CUCURBITACEAE

A A genus of ca. 280 species of n temperate areas, tropical mountains, Madagascar, and
Mexico; it incudes many cultivated, ornamental, succulent herbs and shrublets.
REFERENCES: Clausen 1975; Nesom & Turner 1995; White et al. 1998.

1. Petals yellow; flowers ca. 7 mm across; follicles widely divergent in fruit                          S. nuttallianum
1. Petals white to pink or lavender; flowers 8–12 mm across; follicles ascending in fruit                 S. pulchellum

Sedum nuttallianum Raf., (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-American botanist), YEL-
LOW STONECROP. Glabrous pale green annual to 13(–20) cm tall; leaves linear-oblong, nearly as
thick as wide; inflorescences with 2–5 branches, the flowers remote. Loose sandy or eroding
limestone slopes, shallow soils, or on sandstone outcrops; Post Oak Savannah w to West Cross
Timbers and s to Edwards Plateau. May–Jun.

Sedum pulchellum Michx., (beautiful), TEXAS STONECROP, ROCK-MOSS, WIDOW’S-CROSS. Stems as-
cending, 10–30 cm tall; leaves linear, terete; inflorescences with 2–7 branches, the flowers
closely spaced. Moist rocky areas; Bell Co. (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997), also Coryell, Grayson,
Lamar, and Limestone cos. (White et al. 1998); also far e TX and e Edwards Plateau. Mar–May.


                                          CUCURBITACEAE
                    SQUASH, GOURD OR CUCUMBER FAMILY
Herbaceous annual or perennial vines; monoecious or dioecious; stems with tendrils, trailing or
climbing; leaves usually palmately lobed or compound; flowers unisexual, radially symmetri-
cal; corollas 5-lobed, yellow to greenish yellow, yellow-orange, or white; stamens 3 or 5, free or
variously united; ovary inferior, usually 3-carpellate; fruit in ours a berry (sometimes with a
firm rind and then called a pepo).
AA medium-sized family (775 species in 119 genera) of mainly tropical and warm area (few
temperate) vines containing numerous economically important food plants including SQUASHES,
PUMPKINS, AND MELONS (see following treatments); the fruits and/or flowers of a number of spe-
cies are edible; other species provide ornamental and useful gourds. (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbaceous vines with tendrils and alternate, palmately-
veined, usually lobed or compound, often conspicuous leaves; flowers usually yellow to white,
unisexual; ovary inferior.
REFERENCES: Jeffrey 1975, 1990; Bates et al. 1990; Lira et al. 1997 [1998].

1. Corollas over 5 cm long or across; fruits > 5 cm long or broad, smooth.
   2. Corollas light yellow to yellow or yellow-orange; leaf without disk-shaped gland at base of leaf
      blade; fruits globose to obovoid or cylindric.
      3. Fruits globose to obovoid, to ca. 9 cm long, fleshy inside, with a hard rind; corollas yellow or
         yellow-orange; flowers all solitary; anthers united                                                  Cucurbita
      3. Fruits cylindric, curved or straight, 30–60 cm long, fibrous inside, the rind becoming dry and
         papery; corollas light yellow to yellow; staminate flowers racemose; anthers free                        Luffa
   2. Corollas white; leaf with disk-shaped gland on each side of the base of the leaf blade at junc-
      tion with petiole; fruits variously shaped (bottle, dumbell, club, crook-necked)                        Lagenaria
1. Corollas < 5 cm long or across (often much less); fruits 5 cm or less long or broad (except much
   larger in Cucumus melo, MUSKMELON, and Citrullus lanatus, WATERMELON), smooth or prickly.
   4. Stems and petioles glabrous.
      5. Flowers greenish yellow; fruits unarmed, orange to red when ripe; leaves nearly unlobed to
         deeply 3–5-lobed but not divided into separate leaflets                                              Ibervillea
      5. Flowers white; fruits conspicuously armed with long slender spines, green; leaves divided
         into 3–7 distinct leaflets                                                                         Cyclantheraa
                                                                                  CAYAPONIA /CUCURBITACEAE     565

 4. Stems and/or petioles pubescent (use lens).
    6. Fruits smooth, reddish, 12–14 mm long, with 3–6 seeds; corollas greenish white                    Cayaponia
    6. Fruits prickly or smooth, not reddish, small to very large, with seeds 1–very numerous;
       corollas yellow to greenish yellow to white (if white then fruits with only 1 seed).
       7. Corollas about 4 cm across, yellow; tendrils 2–3-forked; fruits very large (to 60 cm or more
          in length), smooth; seeds obovoid, flat, often 10–15 mm long; leaves very deeply lobed,
          the large central lobe itself ± pinnately lobed                                                 Citrullus
       7. Corollas 2.5 cm or less across, white to yellow or greenish yellow; tendrils usually un-
          branched (if branched then fruits prickly); fruits 5 cm or less long (except in Cucumis
          melo), smooth or prickly; seeds variously shaped, 10 mm or less long (to 12 mm in Cucumis
          melo); leaves usually angled or shallowly lobed, or if deeply lobed, then the central lobe
          itself not pinnately lobed.
          8. Tendrils branched; fruits ovoid, pointed, 1–1.5 cm long, with a single seed, usually with
             prickly bristles; corollas white to cream                                                      Sicyos
          8. Tendrils unbranched; fruits either not pointed or > 3 cm long, many-seeded, smooth
             or prickly; corollas yellow or greenish yellow.
             9. Corollas < 8 mm across; leaves mostly 5-lobed (the basal 2 lobes sometimes small);
                fruits green often with lighter patterning (like a baby watermelon), turning purplish
                black when ripe, smooth, 1–2 cm long                                                     Melothria
             9. Corollas > 10 mm across; leaves either unlobed (but angled) or 3-lobed; fruits never
                purplish blackish, either prickly or much > 2 cm long                                     Cucumis


                                                 CAYAPONIA
AA mainly tropical and subtropical New World genus of 60 species (1 in tropical Africa and
Madagascar) (Jeffrey 1990). (A Brazilian name)

Cayaponia quinqueloba (Raf.) Shinners, (five-lobed). Monoecious, rhizomatous, climbing peren-
nial; leaves long-petiolate; leaf blades 3-angled or -lobed, 5–10 cm long; tendrils simple or
branched; pistillate flowers and fruits on short stalks to 4 mm long or nearly sessile; corollas
greenish white; stamens 3; ovary 3-carpellate with 1 or 2 ovules in each cell; fruits reddish,
ovoid to ellipsoid, somewhat fleshy, 12–14 mm long; seeds 3–6. River bottoms and along
streams; included based on citation for vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990);
Post Oak Savannah w to nc TX and s to Edwards Plateau. Jun–Aug.

                                                 CITRULLUS
AA genus of 4 species native to tropical and s Africa and probably also Asia. (Diminutive of
Citrus, from the supposed resemblance of the fruits to those of that genus of Rutaceae)
REFERENCES: Bailey 1930b; Hara 1969a.

Citrullus lanatus (Thunb.) Matsum. & Nakai var. lanatus, (woolly), WATERMELON, SANDÍA. Mono-
ecious annual with branched tendrils; stems long-trailing, prostrate; leaf blades once or twice
deeply lobed or dissected; ovary densely lanate; fruits green or mottled or striped, very large,
the flesh sweet, succulent, edible, usually red but can be orange, yellow, or white; seeds numer-
ous, obovoid, variously colored. Commonly cultivated and found as a waif around picnic areas,
trash heaps, roadsides, and waste areas; Grayson, Lamar, Palo Pinto, and Somervell cos.; scat-
tered mainly in e 1/2 of TX. May–Nov. Native of Africa. [C. citrullus (L.) H. Karst, C. vulgaris
Schrad.] This species has long been in cultivation; it was known in Egypt in the Bronze Age and
probably much earlier (Zohary 1982); seeds were found in the tomb of Tutankhamun (Hepper
1990). I
566   CUCURBITACEAE/CUCUMIS

Citrullus lanatus var. citroides (L.H. Bailey) Mansf., (resembling Citrus), (CITRON or PRESERVING
MELON), with smaller fruits having hard white flesh that is not edible raw, is also cultivated for
making preserves. I

The name, Citrullus colocynthis(L.) Schrad., (from the classical name), was misapplied to the
WATERMELON by Hatch et al. (1990) and apparently Jones et al. (1997). Citrullus colocynthis, an
Old World species commonly known as the BITTER-APPLE or BITTER-CUCUMBER, is a perennial
with small fruits (< 8 cm in diam.) and a sparsely hispid ovary; it is used as a purgative; we have
no evidence that it is cultivated or escaped in nc TX. For discussion of nomenclature see Hara
(1969a). I

                                              CUCUMIS MELON
Annual, trailing or climbing, pubescent vines; usually monoecious; tendrils unbranched; leaf
blades entire or somewhat lobed; flowers usually short-stalked and hidden by foliage; corollas
yellow, bell-shaped to rotate, deeply 5-parted; fruits fleshy, prickly or smooth; seeds numerous.
AAn Old World tropical genus of ca. 30 species, mainly of tropical and s Africa (Jeffrey 1990);
cultivated since early times. It includes C. sativus L. (CUCUMBER). (Name from classical Latin
word for cucumber)
REFERENCE: Kirkbride 1993.

1. Leaf blades with 3 prominent lobes; ovaries and fruits prickly; flowers ca. 13 mm across (stami-
   nate sometimes larger); seeds < 5 mm long                                                               C. anguria
1. Leaf blades angled, but usually not distinctly lobed; ovaries and fruits not prickly; flowers ca. 25
   mm across; seeds ca. 12 mm long                                                                            C. melo

Cucumis anguria L., (Greek name for cucumber), BUR GHERKIN, WEST INDIAN GHERKIN. Leaf
blades to 9 cm long, deeply 3-lobed, with sinuses rounded and lobes obtuse; fruits oval or ob-
long, furrowed, prickly, ca. 5 cm long, on crooked peduncles. Occasionally cultivated, escapes [?];
included based on citation for vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); nc to s
TX. Aug–Sep. Native of Africa. Kirkbride (1993) named the wild plants var. longaculeatus J.H.
Kirkbr., (long sharp-pointed, in reference to the fruit prickles), with the cultivars treated as var.
anguria . Since Hatch et al. (1990) did not distinguish varieties and we have seen no nc TX mate-
rial, we are uncertain which variety is present in nc TX. The two can be distinguished as fol-
lows (modified from Kirkbride 1993): I

1. Prickles on fruits 0.8–1.9 mm long, appearing as small bumps or warts; apical hyaline bristle of
   prickles on hypanthium of female flowers 2–3 times longer than the opaque base                          var. anguria
1. Prickles on fruits 4–10(–15) mm long, appearing as prickles; apical hyaline bristle of prickles on
   hypanthium of female flowers shorter than the opaque base                                        var. longaculeatus

Cucumis melo L., (melon), MUSKMELON, MELON, CANTELOPE. Leaf blades to 13 cm wide, rounded
at apex; fruits mostly globular or ellipsoid with musky fragrance, the flesh usually yellowish or
orangish to green; corolla tube of male flowers 0.8–2 mm long; corolla tube of female flowers
0.8–2.8 mm long; seeds slender, white. Commonly cultivated and found as a waif around picnic
areas, trash heaps, roadsides, and waste areas; Dallas and Lamar cos.; mainly e 1/2 of TX. May–
Oct. Native of Asia. I

Cucumis sativus L., (cultivated), is the cultivated CUCUMBER; it has ± prickly fruit, corolla tube of
male flowers 3.4–4.9 mm long, corolla tube of female flowers 3.5–6.5 mm long, and leaves
angled or shallowly 3-lobed, with a pointed middle lobe and with ± acute sinuses. It is native to
s Asia. I
                                                                       ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   567




                                                                       Citrullus lanatus [NIC ]


Cayaponia quinqueloba [STE]



                                                                                 ?




                                                                                                            /



                 Cucumis anguria [FAW]
                                                                                       Cucumis melo [LEM]




                                         Cucurbita foetidissima [BB1, MUN]
568   CUCURBITACEAE/CUCURBITA

                                   CUCURBITA GOURD, SQUASH
Annuals or perennials with long running stems; leaf blades large, scabrous, 15–30 cm long;
flowers yellow, solitary in axils; staminate flowers with long pedicels; fruits smooth, fleshy, in-
dehiscent, with a hard rind; seeds usually numerous.
AA genus of ca. 20 species (Jeffrey 1990) of tropical and warm parts of the Americas including
a number of widely cultivated food plants. The genus was important in pre-Colombian
Mesoamerica as part of the maize/beans/squash agricultural system. (Classical Latin name for
a type of gourd)
REFERENCES: Bailey 1929, 1930b; Whitaker & Bemis 1964, 1975; Rhodes et al. 1968; Bemis et al.
1970; Heiser 1979; Decker & Wilson 1986, 1987; Andres 1987; Decker 1988; Decker-Walters 1990;
Nee 1990.

1. Leaf blades usually longer than wide, triangular-ovate, to 30 cm long, angled to weakly lobed,
   scabrous, extremely ill-smelling especially when bruised                                          C. foetidissima
1. Leaf blades usually nearly as wide as long, broadly ovate to reniform, angled to deeply lobed, to
   15 cm long, pubescent, not noticeably ill-smelling                                                      C. texana

Cucurbita foetidissima Kunth, (very fetid, very bad-smelling), BUFFALO GOURD, STINKING GOURD,
FOETID GOURD, CALABAZILLA, CHILICOTE, CALABACILLA LOCA, CHILICOYOTE . Rank-growing, ill-
smelling perennial; stems widely running, to 6 m or more long; leaf blades irregularly and
finely toothed, thickish, often gray-green, rough to the touch; corollas to 10 cm long; fruits glo-
bose, green with lighter stripes, lemon-yellow at maturity, to 7.5 cm broad. Disturbed areas;
nearly throughout TX, more common in w 1/2. Apr–Jul. The seeds were eaten by Native Ameri-
cans; the plant was also used as soap (contains a saponin) and medicinally (Heiser 1979). Dur-
ing frontier days, the leaves and roots were used as a purgative (Crosswhite 1980). This species is
being investigated as a source of starch and oil (Heiser 1993). m/86

Cucurbita texana A. Gray, (of Texas), TEXAS GOURD. Annual; leaves, at least some, distinctly
lobed, relatively thin, green, the margins sharply serrate; corollas to 7 cm long; fruits obovoid to
subglobose, green with lighter stripes or nearly white, to 9 cm long and 6 cm broad, bitter.
Along streams and tributaries, weedy areas; Bell and Lamar (in a seasonally wet ox-bow off the
Red River and in weedy pastures) cos., also Denton, Hamilton, Milam, Navarro (TOES 1993),
and Hamilton (HPC) cos.; scattered in e 1/2 of TX. Jul–Oct. This species was thought to be en-
demic to TX (Correll & Johnston 1970), but naturally occurring populations have apparently
rarely been found in several other states (Decker-Walters 1990; Nee 1990). According to M. Nee
(pers. comm.) and Decker-Walters (1990), C. texana is involved in the origin of C. pepo. Because
of the ability of C. texana and the various C. pepo cultivars to hybridize (Whitaker & Bemis
1964), nomenclature of the group is unsettled. Names such as [C. pepo subsp. ovifera (L.) D.S.
Decker var. texana (Scheele) D.S. Decker] have been proposed; since there is no current
concensus, we are following tradition and recognizing C. texana at the specific level. (TOES
1993: V) m m/86

Cucurbita pepo L., (one-celled, many-seeded, pulpy fruit), PUMPKINS and SQUASH (including
SUMMER CROOK-NECK, SUMMER STRAIGHT-NECK, ZUCCHINI, SCALLOP, PATTYPAN, and ACORN), was
brought into cultivation by Native Americans. This species, with leaves mostly strongly lobed,
can be distinguished from C. texana by its very variable (in the different cultivated forms), but
usually larger and conspicuously differently shaped and colored fruits. While there has been
controversy over whether C. texana populations are naturally occurring or represent escapes
from cultivation of C. pepo var. ovifera (L.) Alef., (egg-bearing), (ORNAMENTAL GOURDS—with
very variable fruits), electrophoretic evidence indicates C. texana populations are distinct from
C. pepo var. ovifera; C. texana is fairly homogeneous genetically with the low levels of genetic
                                                                   CYCLANTHERA/CUCURBITACEAE      569

diversity probably related to endemism and small population size (Decker & Wilson 1987); hy-
bridization between the two can occur (Heiser 1979). It now seems likely that C. texana is a
natural element of the flora (Heiser 1993). Two other Cucurbita species are also cultivated. Both
have foliage soft, or at least not harsh to the touch, in contrast to the rough or harsh foliage of C.
pepo; they also both have the leaves mostly not lobed:

Cucurbita moschata (Duchesne ex Lam.) Duchesne ex Poir., (musky), WINTER CROOK-NECK
SQUASH, BUTTERNUT SQUASH (native of tropical America). Cucurbita moschata has the leaf
blades broadly ovate to ± triangular in outline and peduncles long, furrowed, and flared at junc-
tion with the fruit. I

Cucurbita maxima Duchesne, (largest), AUTUMN SQUASH, WINTER SQUASH, HUBBARD SQUASH,
TURBAN SQUASH (probably native of South America). Cucurbita maxima has the leaf blades cir-
cular to reniform in outline and peduncles short and spongy, nearly cylindric, and not flared at
attachment to the fruit. I

                                        CYCLANTHERA
A A mainly Neotropical genus of ca. 30 species (Jeffrey 1990). (Greek: cyclos, circle, and
anthera , anther, possibly in reference to the united stamens)

Cyclanthera dissecta (Torr. & A. Gray) Arn., (dissected, deeply cut), CUT-LEAF CYCLANTHERA,
BUR-CUCUMBER. Annual monoecious climber with slender stems to 3 m or more long; tendrils
simple to trifid; leaves 3- to 7-foliolate, to 6 cm long; staminate and pistilate flowers both from
the same axils; staminate flowers in racemes or panicles; stamens united into a central column;
pistillate flowers solitary; corollas rotate, 5-parted, white, to 7 mm across; fruits peduncled, 2–3
cm long, ovoid, armed with slender smooth spines, rupturing irregularly, with several seeds.
Rocky soils; Bell and Palo Pinto cos.; widespread in TX. May–Oct.

                                 IBERVILLEA GLOBEBERRY
AA genus of 5 species native to the s U.S. and Mexico (Jeffrey 1990). (Derivation of generic
name not explained by original author, however, possibly named for Iberville, a parish in LA)
REFERENCE: Kearns 1994.

Ibervillea lindheimeri (A. Gray) Greene, (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, German-
born TX collector), BALSAM GOURD, LINDHEIMER’S GLOBEBERRY, BALSAM-APPLE. Perennial dioe-
cious climber with turnip-like taproot; leaves petioled; leaf blades mostly deeply to shallowly 3-
lobed (rarely unlobed or 5-lobed), to 12 cm wide, rather fleshy, with swollen-based hairs;
corollas greenish yellow; staminate flowers 5–8 per raceme, tubular, glandular-puberulent, 6–8
mm long; stamens 3; pistillate flowers solitary, funnelform, ca. 10 mm long; ovary 3-carpellate;
berry globose, ca. 3 cm in diam., reddish orange when ripe, when immature green with lighter
patterning (resembling a small watermelon); seeds numerous. Prairies, woodlands, thickets;
Bell, Callahan, Cooke, Grayson, McLennan, and Palo Pinto cos., also Brown, Kaufman (HPC),
Parker, Somervell, and Tarrant (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos. ; mainly nc to c TX, also w to Plains
Country; endemic to TX and s OK. Apr–Sep. m/93

                          LAGENARIA BOTTLE GOURD, GOURD
AA genus of 6 species of tropical Africa and Madagascar with 1 species widespread in rest of
tropics. (Greek: lagenos, flask, referring to the shape and use of the fruits)
REFERENCE: Heiser 1979.

Lagenaria siceraria (Molina) Standl., (intoxicating, perhaps derived from use of a Lagenaria spe-
cies in making an intoxicating drink), BOTTLE GOURD, WHITE-FLOWER BOTTLE GOURD, CALABASH
570   CUCURBITACEAE/LUFFA

GOURD. Viscid-pubescent, monoecious or rarely dioecious, climbing or trailing annual; tendrils
branched; leaf blades trianglular-ovate, shallowly palmately 3–5 lobed or unlobed, 15–30 cm
wide, cordate basally; flowers 1–2 from leaf axils; corollas white, 5–10 cm across; fruits to 30 cm
long or more, variously shaped, without spines or prickles but sometimes with knobs or ridges;
seeds numerous. Cultivated for the fruit; the tough pericarp is used in making containers (cups,
dippers, bowls, etc.) and decorations; escapes to weedy areas; Dallas Co.; also scattered in se and
e TX. ?–Oct. Native of the Old World tropics. [L. vulgaris Ser.] This species has long been in culti-
vation; BOTTLEGOURDS have been found in Egyptian tombs dating to ca. 3500–3000 BC and in
New World sites dating to ca. 7000 BC; apparently they dispersed by floating across the Atlan-
tic from Africa (Zohary 1982). I

                          LUFFA VEGETABLE-SPONGE, LOOFAH
AA genus of 7 species, 4 of the Old World tropics and 3 of the Neotropics; several are variously
cultivated for the fibrous interior of the fruit, for food, or medicinally (Heiser & Schilling 1990).
(From the Arabic name)
REFERENCES: Heiser 1979; Heiser & Schilling 1990.

Luffa aegyptiaca Mill., (of Egypt), VEGETABLE-SPONGE, ESTROPAJO. Monoecious strong vine with
branched tendrils; leaf blades 3–7-lobed, deltoid to nearly orbicular, 12–30 cm long; corollas
deeply 5-lobed, 5–10 cm across, light yellow to yellow; anthers free; fruits large and conspicu-
ous, ± cylindrical, with light furrows and stripes but without ribs or angles, the interior con-
spicuously fibrous; seeds numerous, narrowly winged. Cultivated for use as a sponge (dried
vascular system of fruit); escapes to weedy areas; Montague Co.; also s TX. ?–Oct. Native of the
Old World. [L. cylindrica (L.) M. Roem.] I

                                 MELOTHRIA MELONETTE
AA genus of 12 species native to the New World (Jeffrey 1990). (Altered from melothron, an
ancient Greek name for some fruiting vine)

Melothria pendula L., (pendulous, hanging), DROOPING MELONETTE, CREEPING-CUCUMBER,
MELONCITO. Slender, usually monoecious, climbing perennial; stems glabrous or nearly so; ten-
drils simple; leaf blades orbicular, 5-angled or -lobed, 3–7 cm long, with pubescence at least on
the veins beneath; cordate at base; petioles pubescent, the hairs sometimes stiff; flowers axillary,
small; corollas yellowish green, 5-angled or -lobed; staminate flowers in racemose or corym-
bose inflorescences, the corollas campanulate; stamens 3; anthers free to barely united; pistil-
late flowers usually solitary or few in a cluster, peduncled, the corollas rotate; ovary 3-carpel-
late; fruits smooth, green often with lighter patterning (like a baby watermelon), turning
purplish black, ovoid, 1–2 cm long; seeds numerous, white. Wooded areas, exposed sites; se and e
TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. May–Nov. The fruits are reported to act as a dras-
tic purgative (Burlage 1968). 9

                                  SICYOS BUR-CUCUMBER
AA genus of ca. 40 species of the New World, Hawaiian Islands, and Australasia (Jeffrey 1990).
(Greek: sicyus, cucumber or gourd)

Sicyos angulatus L., (angled), ONE-SEED BUR-CUCUMBER, WALL BUR-CUCUMBER. Glandular-pubes-
cent, monoecious, climbing annual; tendrils divided into 4 segments; leaves petioled, the peti-
oles to 8 cm long; leaf blades to 20 cm long, suborbicular in outline, 5-angled or -lobed; stami-
nate flowers in axillary racemes or corymbs; pistillate flowers usually from the same axils in
long-peduncled capitate clusters; corollas white to cream; fruits yellowish, 1–1.5 cm long, ovoid,
villous with prickly bristles, with a single seed. Wooded areas; Bell, Cooke, Denton, Tarrant, and
                                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        571




                                  Cucurbita texana [HEA]




     Cyclanthera dissecta [BB2]



                                        Ibervillea lindheimeri [EN1]             Lagenaria siceraria [KER, LAM]




Luffa aegyptiaca [EN1, EN2]       Melothria pendula [GLE]                        Sicyos angulatus [DIL]
572   CUSCUTACEAE/CUSCUTA

Williamson cos.; e and nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. May–Sep. Sometimes cultivated as a climb-
ing screen in landscapes (Mabberley 1997).


                           CUSCUTACEAE DODDER FAMILY
AA small (ca. 145 species), cosmopolitan family of often brightly colored, ± chlorophyll-less,
twining parasites. Cuscuta is the only genus. Related to the Convolvulaceae and sometimes
treated as a monogeneric tribe in that family; however, Cuscutaceae can be readily distin-
guished by their parasitic habit, absence of chlorophyll, and lack of contact with the soil after
parasitizing a host (Tyrl et al. 1994). (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: orange to yellow or whitish, essentially leafless, parasitic
herbs with thread-like stems twining on other plants; flowers small, white to yellowish.
REFERENCES: Austin 1986b; Gandhi et al. 1987.

                                   CUSCUTA DODDER, LOVEVINE
Ours glabrous annual herbs, ± without chlorophyll, with thread-like, orange, yellow, to whitish,
irregularly twining stems; growing as parasites on other plants and attached by haustoria in-
vading the host tissue; losing their chlorophyll upon contact with host plant as a seedling; es-
sentially leafless, the leaves reduced to functionless scales; flowers small, usually numerous, in
loose or dense cymose clusters, pedicelled or sessile; calyces of 3–5 lobes or sometimes of sepa-
rate or nearly separate sepals, the lobes or sepals often overlapping laterally; corollas globose,
white to yellowish, 3- to 5-lobed, with a ring of small, flat, fringed or fimbriated scales inside at
base opposite the stamens; stamens 3–5, attached above the scales; ovaries superior, 2-celled;
stigmas linear to capitate; fruit a capsule.
AThis genus of ca. 145 species includes a number of problematic parasitic weeds which can
seriously reduce the yield of some crops. Other common names are ANGEL’S-HAIR, TANGLEGUT,
WITCHES’-SHOELACES, DEVIL’S-GUT, STRANGLEVINE, and SCALD. In the Sinhalese language of Sri
Lanka, the name of a Cuscuta species means “plant without beginning or end” (Austin 1979a).
According to Austin (1979a), the name DODDER, “… is an ancient one, having come from its
Frissian (Middle English) [Frisian (Low German tongue closely related to Anglo-Saxon)] origin
without change. The word dodder is said to signify a ‘tangle of threads’ in reference to the inter-
twined stems of the plant.” The species are often difficult to identify, especially in spring when
just beginning to flower. (Arabic: kushkut or kusat, a tangled wisp of hair—Austin 1979a)
REFERENCES: Yuncker 1932, 1961; Austin 1979a, 1979b, 1980.

1. Styles partly or completely united; capsules very large, 5–7(–10) mm long; typically parasitizing
   woody plants; stems coarse                                                                               C. exaltata
1. Styles completely separate; capsules usually smaller, usually much < 5 mm long; typically para-
   sitizing herbaceous or woody plants; stems fine to coarse.
   2. Flowers closely subtended by enlarged bracts which resemble the sepals (usually at least 1
      bract per flower); calyces of separate or nearly separate sepals; flowers ca. 4–5 mm long.
      3. Flowers on pedicels (bracts along the pedicels), in loose paniculate clusters                    C. cuspidata
      3. Flowers sessile, in dense clusters.
         4. Bracts with acute, recurved tips; stems disappearing early in the season (other than those
            portions bearing flowers); flowers in very thick, rope-like clusters                          C. glomerata
         4. Bracts with obtuse, erect tips; stems persisting; flowers clustered, sometimes densely so,
            but the clusters not rope-like                                                                C. compacta
   2. Flowers with only minute scale-like bracts not resembling the sepals (an enlarged bract can
      sometimes subtend a group of flowers); calyces of at least partly fused sepals (at base); flowers
      1.5–4 mm long.
                                                                                       CUSCUTA /CUSCUTACEAE         573

    5. Calyces and corollas of most flowers 3–4-lobed, rarely 5-lobed; rare in nc TX, reported from
       only 2 counties.
       6. Sepals reaching the sinuses of corolla; corolla lobes acute with inflexed tips                        C. coryli
       6. Sepals shorter than the corolla tube, not reaching the sinuses; corolla lobes obtuse, not
          inflexed                                                                                      C. cephalanthi
    5. Calyces and corollas of most flowers 5-lobed, rarely 4-lobed; including species widespread
       in nc TX.
       7. Calyx lobes subacute to acute or acuminate, triangular-ovate to triangular-lanceolate in
          shape                                                                                             C. indecoraa
       7. Calyx lobes obtuse, ovate in shape.
          8. Corolla lobes acute to acuminate, with the tips inflexed                                    C. pentagona
          8. Corolla lobes obtuse to acute, the tips not inflexed.
             9. Flowers 2–4 mm long, without granular or glandular coating; calyx lobes overlap-
                ping at base; styles 0.8–1.8 mm long when fully extended, slender; capsules often
                slightly longer than wide; widespread in e half of nc TX                                    C. gronovii
             9. Flowers ca. 1.5–2 mm long, with granular or glandular coating; calyx lobes not or
                scarcely overlapping at base; styles 0.3–0.7 mm long, rather thick; capsules not longer
                than wide; rare in nc TX, reported only from Dallas Co.                                  C. obtusifloraa

Cuscuta cephalanthi Engelm., (of Cephalanthus—buttonbush), BUTTONBUSH DODDER. Flowers
ca. 2 mm long; calyx lobes obtuse. Found at Dallas by Reverchon (Yuncker 1961); not collected
recently in nc TX. Jul–Oct.

Cuscuta compacta Juss. ex Choisy, (compact, dense), COMPACT DODDER. Flowers 4–5 mm long;
calyces subtended by 3–5 bracts; corolla lobes obtuse. Stream bottoms; Dallas Co. (Reverchon);
also e TX. Jul–Oct.

Cuscuta coryli Engelm., (of Corylus—hazel or filbert; often found on members of that genus),
HAZEL DODDER. Flowers ca. 2 mm long; calyx lobes acute; scales inside corolla (below stamens)
rudimentary, unfringed, bifid (with a wing on either side of filament). Related to and similar to
C. indecora; differs in usually 4(–5)-parted flowers and the rudimentary bifid scale. Williamson
Co. (Yuncker 1961); also Robertson Co. in Post Oak Savannah (Yuncker 1961); Hatch et al. (1990)
reported only vegetational areas 3 and 4 (Fig. 2) for TX. Aug–Sep.

Cuscuta cuspidata Engelm., (cuspidate, with a sharp stiff point), CUSP DODDER, CUSPIDATE DOD-
DER. Pedicels distinctive, with 1 or more bracts just below the calyces; flowers ca. 4 mm long;
calyx lobes obtuse or acute; corolla lobes obtuse to acute. Parasitic on a number of herbaceous
species, but according to Yuncker (1961), it seems to prefer members of the Asteraceae including
Ambrosia, Baccharis, Helianthus, Iva and Liatris . Chiefly low open ground; Dallas, Denton,
Grayson, and Limestone cos; widespread in TX. Aug–Oct.

Cuscuta exaltata Engelm., (exalted, very tall), TREE DODDER. Flowers 4–5 mm long, sessile or
subsessile; calyx and corolla lobes obtuse; capsules circumscissile. Limestone areas; typically
parasitizing woody plants, often oaks; Dallas and Johnson (Cleburne State Park) cos., also Bell
(Yuncker 1961) and Coryell (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997) cos.; also se TX and Edwards Plateau.
Sep–Oct. This species is the only member of its subgenus in North America (Yuncker 1932).

Cuscuta glomerata Choisy, (with glomerules, clustered into ± rounded heads), CLUSTER DODDER,
GLOMERATE DODDER. Stems disappearing leaving thick, yellow, rope-like masses of flowers
around the host stems and thus easily recognized by growth form; flowers 4–5 mm long; calyx
and corolla lobes acute or obtuse. Stream bottoms; Hunt and Lamar cos., also Dallas Co.
(Yuncker 1961); also Edwards Plateau and Panhandle. Jul–Sep.

Cuscuta gronovii Willd. ex Schult., (for Jan Frederick Gronovius, 1690–1762, teacher of Linnaeus
574   DIPSACACEAE

and author of “Flora Virginica”), GRONOVIUS’ DODDER, COMMON DODDER. Flowers ca. 2–4 mm
long; calyx lobes overlapping; corolla lobes obtuse. Stream bottoms, low ground; Hunt, Lamar,
and Rockwall cos., also Dallas and Milam cos. (Yuncker 1961); se and e TX w to nc TX. Aug–Nov.
[C. gronovii var. latiflora Engelm.]

Cuscuta indecora Choisy, (not ornamental). Flowers 2–2.5 mm long; calyx lobes shorter or
longer than corolla tube; corolla lobes acute with inflexed tips; scales inside corollas (below sta-
mens) fringed, not bifid. Prairies, roadsides, and stream bottoms. Jun–Oct.

1. Calyx lobes triangular-ovate, subacute, shorter than the corolla tube                             var. indecora
1. Calyx lobes narrowly triangular-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, equaling or exceeding the co-
   rolla tube                                                                                    var. longisepala

var. indecora, SHOWY DODDER, PRETTY DODDER, LARGE-SEED DODDER. Widespread in TX.

var. longisepala Yunck., (long-sepaled), LONG-SEPAL DODDER. Dallas, Ellis, Grayson, and Hill cos.;
scattered in e 1/2 of TX.

Cuscuta obtusiflora Kunth var. glandulosa Engelm., (sp.: obtuse- or blunt-flowered; var.: glandu-
lar), RED DODDER. Flowers 1.5–2 mm long, often with granular or glandular coating; calyx lobes
obtuse, not overlapping; corolla lobes acute to obtusish; capsules depressed globose, not longer
than wide. Sandy or rocky ground, often growing on Polygonumspecies (Yuncker 1961); Dallas
Co. (Yuncker 1961); Hatch et al. (1990) cited regions 1–10 (throughout TX), but this is possibly an
error. May–Sep. [C. glandulosa (Engelm.) Small]

Cuscuta pentagona Engelm., (five-angled). Flowers 1.5–3 mm long. May–Oct. According to Aus-
tin (1986b), parasitizing a variety of hosts including cultivated Fabaceae (e.g., CLOVER and AL-
FALFA). Daniel Austin (pers. comm.) questions the recognition of varieties indicating that even
specific determination is often difficult.

1. Calyx lobes slightly auricled and overlapping at base, sometimes forming angles giving the caly-
   ces an angulate appearance; withered corollas often only at base of capsules                     var. pentagona
1. Calyx lobes not auricled or overlapping at base, the calyces not angulate; withered corollas en-
   veloping the capsules.
   2. Flower parts and pedicels usually not papillate or only slightly so                               var. glabrior
   2. All flower parts (including ovaries and capsules) and pedicels ± densely papillate            var. pubescens

var. glabrior (Engelm.) Gandhi, R.D. Thomas & S.L. Hatch, (smooth, without hairs). Widespread
in TX. [C. glabrior (Engelm.) Yunck.]

var. pentagona, FIELD DODDER, FIVE-ANGLED DODDER. Bell, Coryell, Dallas, Denton, Hunt, and
Limestone cos.; se and e TX w to Lampasas Cut Plain and Edwards Plateau. [C. campestris
Yunck.]

var. pubescens (Engelm.) Yunck., (downy, pubescent). Bell, Burnet, and Dallas cos. (Yuncker
1961); also Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. [C. glabrior (Engelm.) Yunck. var. pubescens
(Engelm.) Yunck.]


                           DIPSACACEAE TEASEL FAMILY
AA small (290 species in 11 genera), Old World (Eurasia and Africa, especially Mediterranean)
family of herbs or subshrubs including a number of ornamentals. Teasels, formerly used in rais-
ing nap on cloth, are obtained from Dipsacus. The Dipsacaceae are closely related to the
Caprifoliaceae and appear to represent an herbaceous clade within that mainly woody family.
From a cladistic standpoint they should be lumped to form a more inclusive monophyletic
                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     575




Cuscuta cephalanthi [BB2]                      Cuscuta compacta [GLE]                    Cuscuta coryli [BB2, GLE]




                       Cuscuta cuspidata [BB2, LUN]                                       Cuscuta exaltata [LUN]




                     Cuscuta glomerata [GLE, LUN]                                        Cuscuta gronovii [BB2]
576   DROSERACEAE/DROSERA

Caprifoliaceae (Judd et al. 1994). Family name from Dipsacus, TEASAL, a genus of 15 species of
Eurasia, the Mediterranean, and tropical African mountains; the rigid-bracted heads of D.
sativus (L.) Honck. were long used to raise the nap on cloth—hence the name TEASEL. (Greek:
dipsakos, the classical name for teasel) (subclass Asteridae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is an introduced annual herb with
opposite leaves and small flowers in involucrate heads (resembling Asteraceae); corollas sym-
petalous, bilaterally symmetrical, with 4 separate epipetalous stamens; ovary inferior. Superfi-
cially similar to Asteraceae; however, Asteraceae can be distinguished by their flowers with 5
stamens fused by their anthers.
REFERENCES: Ferguson 1965; Donoghue et al. 1992; Judd et al. 1994.

                                           SCABIOSA
AA genus of 80 species native to temperate Eurasia, the Mediterranean region, mountains of e
Africa, and s Africa; herbs usually with an umbrella-like epicalyx functioning in wind dispersal
of the fruit. (Latin: scabies, itch; the rough leaves were used medicinally to treat skin complaints)

Scabiosa atropurpurea L., (dark purple), PINCUSHIONS, SWEET SCABIOUS. Annual herb 20–60 cm
tall; leaves opposite; basal leaves simple, dentate; upper leaves pinnately parted, the lobes entire
to dentate; stipules absent; flowers in peduncled involucrate heads resembling some in the
Asteraceae; involucral bracts narrowly lanceolate, herbaceous, distinct; involucel subtending
each flower; corollas white to rose, lilac, or dark purple, bilaterally symmetrical; calyces pap-
pus-like, of 5 bristles; corollas 5-lobed, the lobes unequal; stamens 4, distinct, epipetalous; ovary
inferior; achenes with 5 persistent conspicuous calyx bristles. Garden escape currently rapidly
spreading and becoming a problematic invasive weed in fields, roadsides, and prairies; Collin,
Dallas, Fannin, Grayson, Hopkins, Hunt, and Lamar cos.; apparently at present in TX only in nc
part of the state. Jun–Sep. Native of Europe. I

                      DROSERACEAE SUNDEW FAMILY
AA small (ca. 113 species in 4 genera) cosmopolitan family of insectivorous herbs including
Dionaea muscipula J. Ellis, (fly-catching), (VENUS ’-FLYTRAP), from the se U.S. Aldrovanda,
Dionaea , and Drosophyllum are all monotypic with Drosera having most of the species in the
family. In Drosera the hairs are motile, and entrap and digest insects using secreted proteolytic
enzmes and ribonucleases; in Dionaea the 2 halves of the leaves swing together trapping the
victim; Aldrovanda is a rootless aquatic with insect-trapping leaves like Dionaea . Most species
are found in nitrogen poor habitats such as bogs or wet sandy areas. As with most carnivorous
plants, nutrients (especially nitrogen), rather than calories, are gained through carnivory. A
molecular study using 18S ribosomal DNA sequences suggested that Droseraceae and
Nepenthaceae (an Old World carnivorous family) are the sister group to the Caryophyllidae
(Soltis et al. 1997). (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is an herb with small rosettes of
leaves; leaves conspicuously broader towards tip, with tentacle-like hairs secreting glistening
droplets of sticky fluid which trap insects; flowers on a scape.
REFERENCE: Wood 1960.

                                     DROSERA SUNDEW
AA cosmopolitan genus (especially s hemisphere) of ca. 110 species of insectivorous herbs typi-
cally found in wet areas. (Greek: droseros, dewy; the glands of the leaves exude drops of a clear glu-
tinous fluid, glittering like dew drops and giving rise to both the generic and common names)
REFERENCES: Wynne 1944; Shinners 1962d; Wood 1966; Pietropaolo & Pietropaolo 1986.
                                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        577




                                                                                              REMOVED
                                                                                               CALYX




                                                                                              Cuscuta indecora var. longisepala [MTB]


                                               REMOVED
                                                CALYX

                         Cuscuta indecora var. indecora [LUN, REE]




                                                                                              Cuscuta pentagona var. glabrior [LUN]




                     Cuscuta obtusiflora var. glandulosa [GLE , LUN]




Cuscuta pentagona var. pentagona [REE]             Scabiosa atropurpurea [BL1]                    Drosera brevifolia [GWO]
578   EBENACEAE/DIOSPYROS

Drosera brevifolia Pursh, (short-leaved), ANNUAL SUNDEW. Small insectivorous herb; leaves in a
basal rosette, fiddle-head-like in bud, suborbicular (with petiole longer than blade) to nearly
spatulate with enlarged terminal portion, to 15 mm long, with conspicuous, red, gland-tipped,
motile hairs which secrete a clear sticky fluid used in trapping insects; stipules absent or vesti-
gial; scape to 12 cm tall, with gland-tipped hairs except at base; flowers up to 6 per scape, radi-
ally symmetrical, usually 5-merous, hypogynous; sepals ovate, 2.5–4 mm long; petals pink or
roseate, 2.5–8 mm long; ovary superior; capsules 3.5–4 mm long; seeds black, with pits in 10–12
rows. Deep sand in woods or in open bogs; included based on citation of vegetational area 4
(Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); se and e TX w to at least c Henderson Co. (s of Athens) near e mar-
gin of nc TX. Feb–Jun. [D. annua E.L. Reed, D. leucantha Shinners] This Drosera species, 2 Utricu-
laria species (BLADDERWORTS —Lentibulariaceae), and Sarracenia alata A.W. Wood
(PITCHERPLANT or YELLOW-TRUMPETS—Sarraceniaceae) are the only carnivorous plants in nc TX.


               EBENACEAE PERSIMMON OR EBONY FAMILY
AThe Ebenaceae is a medium-sized (485 species in 2 genera) family of the tropics and warm
areas with a few temperate species; most are trees; some have edible fruits (e.g., Diospyros—PER-
SIMMONS, JAPANESE PERSIMMONS, DATE-PLUMS, VELVET-APPLES), while others are valuble for timber
including EBONY, a black, hard, heavy wood obtained from species of Diospyros. Family name con-
served from Ebenum, a genus now treated as Diospyros(the name Diospyros was published ear-
lier and thus has priority in terms of nomenclature) (Derivation either from Greek: ebenos, name
used by Hippocrates for a leguminous plant or possibly the ebony tree, or from Latin: ebenus, ebony
or black; the heartwood of some species is strikingly black in color) (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: shrubs or small trees with alternate, simple, entire, exstipu-
late leaves; milky juice absent; flowers small, axillary, usually of a single sex, with connate pet-
als and superior ovaries; fruit a berry with several large seeds.
REFERENCES: Wood & Channell 1960; Spongberg 1977; Morton et al. 1996 [1997].

                                 DIOSPYROS PERSIMMON, EBONY
Shrubs or small trees; leaves alternate, nearly sessile to short-petioled; leaf blades simple, oblong
or elliptic, entire; flowers rather small, axillary, solitary or few together, short-pedicelled, droop-
ing, imperfectly unisexual, the pistillate larger, with 8 empty filaments, the staminate smaller,
with 16 stamens; calyces subrotate, deeply 4-lobed, enlarging in age; corollas urceolate to cam-
panulate or salverform, creamy or yellowish white, somewhat fleshy, with 4, short, auricled,
laterally overlapping lobes; stamens attached to corolla near its base, with wide, pilose fila-
ments; pistil 1; ovary superior; style divided half way or more into 4 branches; fruit a berry with
several large seeds.
AA mainly tropical genus of ca. 475 species including a number important for fruit and tim-
ber. The common name is derived from pasimenan, the Native America Lenape word for the
tree (Peattie 1948). Diospyros ebenum J. König ex Retz., native of India and Sri Lanka, is the
EBONY of commerce; its wood is black and extremely hard; it is used in inlays, for piano keys,
and in other uses where its color and density are important. EBONY is so dense that it is one of
relatively few woods that will not float in water. Diospyroskaki L.f., (JAPANESE PERSIMMON, KAKI),
of e Asia, produces large fruits that are widely available in U.S. supermarkets. (Greek: dios, of
Zeus or Jove, and pyros, grain, alluding to the edible fruits)
REFERENCE: Hiern 1873.

1. Ovaries and fruits pubescent; fruits black; leaves 2–5 cm long, subsessile; s part of nc TX; bark ±
   smooth, peeling in thin layers, grayish                                                               D. texana
                                                                                  ELAEAGNUS/ELAEAGNACEAE          579

1. Ovaries and fruits glabrous; fruits yellowish to orangish; leaves 7–15 cm long, with distinct peti-
   oles (ca. 7–10 mm long); widespread in nc TX; bark deeply divided into small blocks or plates,
   dark brown or blackish                                                                                D. virginiana

Diospyros texana Scheele, (of Texas), TEXAS PERSIMMON, MEXICAN PERSIMMON, BLACK PERSIMMON,
CHAPOTE PERSIMMON . Tree to ca. 30 m tall; leaves permanently pubescent; fruits ca. 2 cm in
diam., sweet and edible when ripe. Rocky woods, slopes, open areas, and along streams; s part of
nc TX in Bell, Brown, and McLennan cos., also Milam Co. (Little 1976); widespread in TX, espe-
cially w 2/3. Feb–Jun. The black juice of the fruits was used during frontier days to dye buck-
skin or leather black (Crosswhite 1980).

Diospyros virginiana L., (of Virginia), COMMON PERSIMMON, EASTERN PERSIMMON. Shrub or small
tree to ca. 16 m tall; heartwood hard and dark brown; leaves glabrous or nearly so at maturity;
fruits to 5 cm in diam., ripening in fall and some often long persistent on the tree (numerous
fruits have been observed in January), sweet and edible when ripe. Woods, old fields, and clear-
ings; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun. The tough hard wood has
been used for such things as billard balls, golf-club heads, and textile weaving shuttles (Cox &
Leslie 1991). The unripe fruits are notoriously astringent; however, despite anecdotes to the con-
trary, a frost is not necessary for ripening. The fruits are an important wildlife food; they were
reportedly used to make a beer by Native Americans in the e U.S. (Hedrick in Heiser 1993).


                       ELAEAGNACEAE OLEASTER FAMILY
AA small (45 species in 3 genera) family mainly native to temperate and warm areas of the n
hemisphere to tropical Asia and Australia; most are shrubs to small trees with silvery or golden
scales; they are typically armed and usually have nitrogen-fixing root nodules; several genera
are used as ornamentals including Elaeagnus and Hippophae. (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: alternate-leaved, usually spiny, introduced shrubs with very
distictive, peltate or stellate, silvery scales conspicuously covering the leaves and young twigs;
flowers 4-merous.
REFERENCE: Graham 1964.

                             ELAEAGNUS SILVER-BERRY OLEASTER
AA genus of ca. 40 species native to Europe, Asia, and North America including cultivated
ornamental shrubs; some species are important for their edible fruits. (Greek: elaia , olive, and
agnos, the name of the CHASTE-TREE, Vitex agnus-castus, from hagnos, pure; the name was origi-
nally applied to a willow with massed white fruit)

Elaeagnus pungens Thunb., (piercing, sharp-pointed), THORNY ELAEAGNUS. Spreading shrub to
ca. 4 m tall, usually spiny; branchlets brown; leaves evergreen, alternate, simple, elliptic to
nearly ovate, 4–10 cm long, 2–3.5 cm wide, the lower surface densely covered with silvery,
lobed, peltate scales and dotted with a few reddish brown scales giving the surface a striking
dirty silver appearance, the margins entire, undulate; petioles 6–12 mm long; flowers usually 1–
3 in the leaf axils, fragrant, with a tubular hypanthium 7–10 mm long; sepal lobes 4, petal-like,
shorter than the hypanthium; petals absent; stamens 4, on short filaments attached in throat of
hypanthium; carpel 1; ovary superior but hypanthium persistent and making it seem inferior;
fruits drupe-like, 10–15 mm long, covered with scales and tipped with the persistent hy-
panthium, initially brown, eventually red. Widely cultivated and escapes; Dallas (spreading
along White Rock Creek) and Tarrant cos.; we are not aware of other TX localities. Late fall.
Native of Japan and China. I
580   ELATINACEAE/BERGIA

Elaeagnus angustifolia L., (narrow-leaved), OLEASTER, RUSSIAN-OLIVE, a Eurasian species with
deciduous leaves, silvery-white or silvery-gray branchlets, and flowering in spring, is also culti-
vated in nc TX. I


                       ELATINACEAE WATERWORT FAMILY
Ours small annual herbs of wet areas; leaves simple, opposite, entire, with paired membranous
stipules between them; flowers 1–few in the leaf axils, small, radially symmetrical, 2–5-merous;
sepals and petals both present; stamens 1 or 2 times as many as the petals; pistil 1; ovary supe-
rior, 2–5 celled; fruit a subglobose capsule; seeds pitted.
AA small (34 species in 2 genera), temperate and especially tropical family including a num-
ber of aquatics. (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: small wet area herbs with opposite, simple, stipulate leaves
and inconspicuous flowers.
REFERENCE: Tucker 1986.

1. Plants erect to ascending, 10–40 cm tall; stems with short glandular pubescence; sepals and
   petals usually 5 each; sepals with thick green midrib and scarious margins, with a small sharp
   tooth at tip                                                                                                 Bergia
1. Plants creeping and mat-forming (some stems can be ascending to erect), 10 cm or less tall;
   stems glabrous; sepals and petals 2–3 each; sepals without distinct midrib, obtuse                          Elatine


                                                     BERGIA
AA genus of 24 species native to warm areas of the world. (Named for Peter Bergius, 1723–1817,
Swedish botanist and student of Linnaeus)

Bergia texana (Hook.) Walp., (of Texas), TEXAS BERGIA. Annual, usually branched at base, the
whole plant ± glandular-puberulent; leaves to 30 mm long, elliptic to oblong, acute, serrulate;
flowers 1–3 in the leaf axils, on short pedicels ca. 1 mm long; sepals 5, 2–4 mm long; petals 5,
white, not exceeding the sepals; stamens 5 or 10; fruits to ca. 3 cm wide. Muddy pond margins,
along creeks; Cooke, Dallas, Denton, Falls, and Parker cos., also locally abundant around stock
tanks in Brown Co. (Stanford 1976); widespread in TX. May–Oct.

                                          ELATINE WATERWORT
Low, creeping, mat-forming, almost moss-like annuals, often rooting at the nodes; flowers 1–2
per node.
AA genus of 10 species native to tropical and temperate areas; some are used as aquarium
plants. (Greek: elatino, fir-like, from a European species that suggests such a plant in miniature)
REFERENCES: Duncan 1964; Kaul 1986c.

1. Leaves without a notch at tip, usually obovate to narrowly oblong-ovate (rarely linear-spatulate);
   largest seeds with 9–15 pits in each row                                                          E. brachysperma
1. Leaves often with a slight notch at tip, linear to narrowly spatulate; largest seeds with 16–25 pits
   in each row                                                                                              E. triandraa

Elatine brachysperma A. Gray, (short-seeded), SHORT-SEED WATERWORT. Forming small mats to
ca. 5 cm across, the branches ascending; leaves to 6 mm long and 2 mm wide; sepals 2 or with a
third reduced; petals 3, pinkish. On mud or in shallow water; Comanche Co. (Correll & Correll
1972), also cited for vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); also se and c TX to
Rolling Plains. Mar–Oct. [E. triandra Schkuhr var. brachysperma (A. Gray) Fassett]
                                                                                                    ERICACEAE   581

Elatine triandra Schkuhr, (with three anthers or stamens), AMERICAN WATERWORT. Forming
mats, the branches can be ascending to erect; leaves 3–6(–12) mm long, 1–3 mm wide; perianth
greenish or pinkish, usually with 3 sepals and 3 petals. On mud or in shallow water; found at
Dallas by Reverchon in Mar 1874, apparently not collected there since; se and c TX to nc TX
and Rolling Plains. Mar–Oct. We are following Kaul (1986c) and Hatch et al. (1990) in lumping
[E. americana (Pursh) Arn., E. triandra var. americana (Pursh) Fassett].

                ERICACEAE HEATH OR BLUEBERRY FAMILY
Ours shrubs, trees, or mycoparasitic herbs; leaves simple, alternate; petals united (separate in
Monotropa); stamens twice as many as corolla lobes; anthers awned or awnless, opening by ter-
minal pores; pollen grains in tetrads (singly in Monotropa); ovary superior or inferior; fruit a
capsule or berry.
AA large (4,500 species in 160 genera (Stevens 1995)), cosmopolitan family of usually shrubs
with some herbs and trees; the majority of tropical taxa are montane. Most species are found in
nutrient-poor, acidic habitats and have a relationship with mycorrhizal fungi. The family in-
cludes many important ornamentals (e.g., AZALEAS and RHODODENDRONS in the genus Rhodo-
dendron, HEATHS in the genus Erica , Arctostaphylos(BEARBERRY and MANZANITA), and Kalmia
(MOUNTAIN-LAUREL), as well as edible Vaccinium species (BLUEBERRIES and CRANBERRIES) and
Gaylussacia species (HUCKLEBERRIES). 9The leaves of other species (e.g., Kalmia —LAMBKILL,
SHEEPKILL , Leucothoe—FETTERBUSH, and Lyonia) are poisonous; Kalmia species can be the
source of poison honey, when visited by bees (Hardin & Brownie 1993). The family has some-
times been split with groups such as the mycoparasitic Monotropa and its relatives raised to
family rank (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997). However, molecular studies and cladistic analy-
ses (Judd & Kron 1993; Kron & Chase 1993; Kron 1996) support the inclusion of the
Monotropaceae, Pyrolaceae, Epacridaceae, and Empetraceae to form a monophyletic Ericaceae.
We are therefore treating the Ericaceae in the broad inclusive sense. Family name from Erica ,
HEATH or HEATHER, a genus of ca. 665 species of shrubs and small trees native primarily to s Af-
rica (650 species there with 520 endemic to the Cape region), and also in tropical African
mountains, the Mediterranean, Macaronesia, and Europe; Erica species cover large areas of
moorlands in Europe. (Greek: ereike , heather, from ereiko, to break; an infusion from the leaves
was supposed to break bladder stones) (subclass Dilleniidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: usually shrubs or trees (1 genus of reduced mycoparasitic
herbs) with alternate, simple, rather leathery, often evergreen leaves and usually urn-shaped,
cylindric, or campanulate corollas (many funnel-shaped in species outside nc TX); anthers
opening by terminal pores.
REFERENCES: Small 1914a, 1914b; Wood 1961; Judd & Kron 1993; Kron & Chase 1993; Luteyn
1995; Stevens 1995.

1. Plants mycoparasitic herbs lacking chlorophyll (plant white to tinged with rose), 5–30 cm tall;
   leaves reduced to scale-like bracts                                                                   Monotropa
1. Plants shrubs or trees with green photosynthetic leaves with well-developed blades.
   2. Flowers in panicles; fruit a berry with a distinctive roughened-tuberculate surface; ovary supe-
      rior; plant a small tree or rarely arborescent shrub, 4–6(–10 m or more) tall; leaves evergreen      Arbutus
   2. Flowers in racemes or umbel-like clusters; fruit a dry capsule OR a berry with a smooth surface;
      ovary superior and developing into a capsule OR inferior and developing into a berry; plants
      varying from shrubs < 2 m tall to small trees to 8 m tall; leaves essentially evergreen OR
      deciduous.
      3. Fruit a berry (blueberry-like) crowned by the small persistent calyx teeth; corollas 4–6 mm
         long, open campanulate; ovary inferior; shrubs or small trees to 8 m tall; leaves essentially
         evergreen                                                                                       Vaccinium
582    ERICACEAE/ARBUTUS

      3. Fruit a dry capsule; corollas 8–13 mm long, urceolate-cylindric; ovary superior; shrubs < 1(–
         2) m tall; leaves deciduous                                                                     Lyonia

                                  ARBUTUS MADRONE, MADROÑO
AA genus of 10 species, with 3 in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa, 1 on the Canary
Islands, and 6 in the New World (Sørensen 1995). (Latin name for strawberry tree, probably
originally applied to A. unedo L., strawberry tree)
REFERENCE: Sørensen 1995.

Arbutus xalapensis Kunth, (for its type locality near Jalapa or Xalapa, in the Mexican state of
Veracruz), TEXAS MADRONE, MADROÑO, LADY’S-LEG, NAKED-INDIAN. Small tree or rarely arbores-
cent shrub, 4–6(–10 m or more) tall; bark pinkish to brick red, peeling off in large smooth
flakes, the naked branches distinctive; leaves alternate, evergreen, coriaceous, ovate to oval or
oblong-elliptic, to 10 cm long and 45 mm wide, entire to serrate, glabrate with age; inflores-
cence a panicle; flowers perfect; calyx lobes 5, pinkish white; corollas ovoid-urceolate, white,
often pink-tinged, ca. 7 mm long; stamens included, 10; anthers ca. 1.5 mm long, with a pair of
slender reflexed spurs on the back, opening by terminal pores; ovary superior; fruit a ± spheri-
cal berry, red to yellowish red, 7.5–9 mm in diam., fleshy, with ovules 2–several per locule, the
fruit surface roughened-tuberculate. Wooded rocky hills, slopes, canyons, plains; three occur-
rences are known n of the Colorado River in Travis Co. (Balcones Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife
Refuge, C. Sexton, pers. comm.) just s of the nc TX border; included because of possibility of oc-
currence in extreme s part of nc TX; Edwards Plateau to Trans-Pecos. Feb–Apr. [A. texana
Buckley, A. xalapensis var. texana (Buckley) A. Gray] According to Sørensen (1995), the TX
plants with small glabrous leaves are part of a north-south cline involving a gradual change
from plants with large pubescent leaves found in s Mexico and n Central America. The TX
plants have often been recognized as a distinct species or variety, but we are following Sørensen
(1995) in lumping them into A. xalapensis despite their morphological distinctiveness. Fruits
edible (Correll & Johnston 1970).

                                                     LYONIA
AA genus of 36 species native to e and se Asia, e North America including Mexico, and the
Greater Antilles (Judd 1995); some are cultivated as ornamental shrubs. (Named for John Lyon,
17??–1818, early American botanist and explorer of the s Alleghenies)
REFERENCES: Judd 1995; Kron & Judd 1997 [1998].

Lyonia mariana (L.) D. Don, (of Maryland), STAGGERBUSH. Shrub usually < 1 m tall (rarely to 2
m); leaves elliptic-oblong to elliptic-lanceolate or narrowly obovate, entire, to 11 cm long and 5
cm wide, deciduous; flowers in umbel-like fascicles (= clusters) along leafless old branches; co-
rollas 8–13 mm long, white or pinkish; ovary superior; capsules ca. 7 mm long. Usually moist,
sandy, wooded areas; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau; included based on citation
of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990). Mar–Jun. The leaves are thought to
be poisonous to young grazing animals; the poisonous principle is apparently andromedotoxin,
a resinoid, or arbutin, a glycoside (Hardin & Brownie 1993). 9

                                                 MONOTROPA
Obligately mycoparasitic (= indirectly parasitize plants via fungi) fleshy herbs lacking chloro-
phyll; plants waxy white or yellow or reddish, becoming tinged with pink or red, and eventu-
ally drying dark; leaves reduced to scale-like bracts; inflorescences nodding in flower, becom-
ing erect in fruit; flowers (3–)5(–6)-merous; calyces similar to or different from corollas or
occasionally absent; corollas cylindric or slightly flared distally, of separate petals; stamens 8 or
10; pollen grains shed singly (usually in tetrads in the Ericaceae); fruit a capsule.
                                                           ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS       583




    Diospyros texana [SA3]                                 Diospyros virginiana [SA3]




Elaeagnus pungens [RKG]          Bergia texana [MAS ]                        Elatine brachysperma [MAS]




  Elatine triandra [EN2, KAR]   Arbutus xalapensis [SA3]                         Lyonia mariana [ROE]
584   EUPHORBIACEAE

AA widespread n temperate genus (Europe, Himalayas, Japan, North and Central America) of
2 species with disjunct populations in the tropics (Wallace 1995). While Kartesz (1994) and
Jones et al. (1997) placed Monotropa in the Monotropaceae, we are following Stevens (1995) and
Wallace (1995) in treating the Monotropoideae as a subfamily of the Ericaceae. (Greek: monos,
one, and tropos, turn, from the summit of the flowering stem nodding, turned to one side)
REFERENCES: Correll 1965; Stevens 1995; Wallace 1975, 1993, 1995.

1. Flowers several (rarely reduced to only 1) per inflorescence; inflorescences (as well as rest of
   plant) at flowering time ranging in color from light yellow to reddish, drying brownish; plants
   often downy or finely pubescent; stigma often subtended by a ring of stiff hairs                      M. hypopithyss
1. Flower solitary per inflorescence, never more; inflorescences (as well as rest of plant) at flowering
   time usually waxy white or rarely tinged pink or orange-red or combinations of these, drying
   black; plants glabrous; stigma not subtended by a ring of stiff hairs                                    M. uniflora
                                                                                                                      a

Monotropa hypopithys L., (old generic name from Greek, hypo, under, and pitys, pine), AMERICAN
PINESAP. Plant 5–30 cm tall; leaves scale-like, 5–12 mm long; inflorescence usually a several-
flowered raceme; pedicels slender, 2–20 mm long, to 30 mm in fruit; sepals ± unlike petals,
sometimes absent; petals 8–17(–20) mm long; styles 1–2 mm wide; capsules 6–10 mm long. Hu-
mus in woods; included based on citation (Correll 1965) of Lamar Co. specimen (Correll &
Correll 27488); mainly e TX, also disjunct to Trans-Pecos. Apr–Jul. [M. latisquama Rydb.]

Monotropa uniflora L., (one-flowered), INDIAN-PIPE. Plant 5–30 cm tall; leaves scale-like, 5–12(–
15) mm long; sepals ± like petals; petals 10–20 mm long; styles 2–5 mm wide; capsules 7–11 mm
long. Forest floor humus, under pines and hardwoods; Fannin Co. (Talbot property) in Red
River drainage, also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly e TX. Apr–Jul. m/100

                                        VACCINIUM BLUEBERRY
AA large genus (ca. 450 species) native to circumpolar areas, Europe, North America, tropical
areas of the Americas, c and se African mountains, Madagascar, Japan, and tropical Asia to Ma-
laysia. It includes deciduous or evergreen shrubs, small trees, and lianas, many of which have
edible fruits including BLUEBERRY, BUCKBERRY, HUCKLE-BERRY, BLUETS, BILBERRY, WHORTLE-BERRY,
BLAEBERRY, CRANBERRY, COWBERRY, LINGBERRY, LINGENBERRY, and FOXBERRY; 9 at least several
Latin American species have toxic fruits. The CRANBERRY is V. macrocarpon Aiton, native to e
North America. Edible BLUEBERRIES are cultivated in the sandy soils of n Fannin Co. by the
Walker family. (Latin name variously applied to Vaccinium myrtillus L. or Hyacinthus; origin
obscure, possibly from bacca, berry, or vaccinus, of cows)
REFERENCES: Camp 1945; Vander Kloet 1988.

Vaccinium arboreum Marshall, (tree-like), FARKLE-BERRY, SPARKLE-BERRY. Shrub or small tree to 8
m tall; leaves obovate to oblong-elliptic, entire or with some teeth, to ca. 7 cm long and 3.5 cm
wide, essentially evergreen; flowers in loose leafy-bracted racemes, the bracts much smaller
than the leaves; corollas 4–6 mm long, white; ovary inferior; berries black or reddish black, of-
ten dryish and mealy to moist. Sandy soils, open woods, thickets, fields; Henderson and Lime-
stone cos. on e margin of nc TX, also w in Red River drainage through Lamar to Fannin and
Grayson cos.; the Grayson population (Preston Bend Park) is isolated on an outcrop of Trinity
sand ca. 30 miles west of any other known TX site; mainly se and e TX. Mar–May. [V. arboreum
var. glaucescens(Greene) Sarg.]


                         EUPHORBIACEAE SPURGE FAMILY
Ours annual or perennial herbs, shrubs, or small trees with watery or milky juice; leaves alter-
nate or less often opposite, simple (sometimes so deeply lobed as to appear compound, occa-
                                                                                       EUPHORBIACEAE       585

sionally some leaves divided into palmate leaflets), entire, toothed, or lobed, with or without
stipules; flowers axillary or terminal, solitary, in racemes, spikes, or heads, various in structure,
unisexual or bisexual; perianth absent, or present and of 1 type of part only, or of both sepals
and petals; stamens 1–many; pistil 1, usually 3-celled and forming a 3-angled or 3-lobed ovary
(a few species with these parts reduced to 2 or 1); ovary superior; fruit a capsule (sometimes
considered a capsular-schizocarp), usually 3-seeded, or in 1 species of Croton, an achene.
AA huge (8,100 species in 313 genera), cosmopolitan, but especially tropical family; vegeta-
tively they vary from herbs to shrubs, lianas, large trees, or succulents; often there are special-
ized cells or tubes with milky or colored latex. A number are economically important includ-
ing Aleurites species (TUNG -OIL), Euphorbia pulcherrima Willd. ex Klotzsch (POINSETTIA),
Hevea brasiliensis (Juss.) Müll.Arg. (RUBBER, PARÁ RUBBER), Manihot esculenta Crantz (MANIOC,
CASSAVA, or TAPIOCA), and Ricinus communisL. (CASTOR-BEAN); many other species are used as
ornamentals. The latex of Hevea brasiliensis, a native of the Amazon Basin, is obtained (“rub-
ber tapping”) by making sloping incisions in the bark and collecting the white liquid in cups
attached below the incisions; upon drying in the air or when coagulated by acid, the latex takes
on its well known elastic properties. 9A number of species are poisonous due to the presence
of alkaloids and cyanogenic glycosides; others have diterpenoids that can cause irritant derma-
titis and may act as co-carcinogens (= promote the action of “sub”-carcinogenic doses of known
carcinogens) (Kinghorn 1979; Lampe 1986). In dry areas of the Old World, a number of Euphor-
bia species are xerophytically adapted and convergent vegetatively with Cactaceae. The com-
mon name SPURGE is apparently derived from the Latin word purgare, to purge or cleanse; a
number of members of the family are regarded as having cathartic or purgative properties
(Tveten & Tveten 1993). (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: ours mostly herbs (a few small shrubs and 1 tree) often with
milky sap and leaves usually alternate or less often opposite (mostly in Chamaesyce); ovary 3-
celled, superior, typically developing into a capsule with 3 lobes or sections; flowers often uni-
sexual, sometimes highly reduced.
REFERENCES: Wheeler 1943; Punt 1962; Webster 1967, 1994a, 1994b; Jensen et al. 1994; Kapil &
Bhatnagar 1994; Nowicke 1994; Seigler 1994; Steinmann & Felger 1997.

1. Trees 3–10 m tall; leaf blades rhombic-ovate, 3–7(–10) cm long, with petioles usually longer than
   blades, with 2 glands at juncture of blade and petiole; rarely escaped introduced species ___________ Sapium
1. Herbs or small shrubs, usually 1 m or less tall, often much less, rarely to ca. 2 m or more tall (Croton
   alabamensis); leaves not as above; mostly native species.
   2. Leaf blades palmately lobed, 6–60 cm wide.
      3. Plants with extremely painful stinging hairs; leaf blades with petioles attached basally, 6–15
         cm wide; perianth white ______________________________________________________ Cnidoscolus
      3. Plants without stinging hairs; leaf blades peltate, 10–60 cm wide; perianth greenish or
         purplish _______________________________________________________________________ Ricinus
   2. Leaf blades entire to toothed, not palmately lobed, usually < 6 cm wide.
      4. Flowers with scaly or green perianth parts, borne in various sorts of inflorescences, but not
         in cup-like involucres; sap usually not milky (milky only in Stillingia).
         5. Plants with stellate hairs or lepidote scales on at least some parts, these often giving the
            foliage a distinctive silvery to yellowish or brownish color (the hairs and scales, while
            visible to the naked eye, are striking with a hand lens) _________________________________ Croton
         5. Plants with simple (unbranched) or malpighiaceous (attached at middle) hairs or gla-
            brous; foliage green.
            6. Flowers or inflorescences axillary or at least appearing so (uppermost sometimes sub-
               tended only by very reduced leaves); sap not milky.
586    EUPHORBIACEAE/ACALYPHA

               7. Flowers solitary or in small umbel-like clusters; leaves 5–30 mm long (to 45 mm in
                  the rare Reverchonia restricted to deep sand); seeds 2 per locule.
                  8. Plants of deep sand; calyx lobes conspicuous, purplish or pinkish, with a central
                     greenish strip, 1.5–2.9 mm long; capsules 7–9.8 mm wide; extremely rare if present
                     in w part of nc TX ___________________________________________________ Reverchonia
                  8. Plants of various soils including sand and limestone; calyx lobes not as above;
                     capsules 1.7–3.2(–7.5) mm wide (3.2 mm or less except in the rare Andrachne);
                     widespread in nc TX.
                     9. Herbs (P. polygonoides becoming lignified at base) to ca. 0.5 m tall; leaf blades
                        elliptic to narrowly oblanceolate, 2–8(–11) mm wide; pedicels absent or up to
                        7 mm long; male and female flowers usually, but not always, on the same plant;
                        flowers apetalous; capsules 1.7–3.2 mm wide; including species widespread in
                        nc TX ____________________________________________________________ Phyllanthus
                     9. Shrubs up to ca. 1 m tall; leaf blades elliptic-oblong to orbicular, 6–15 mm wide;
                        pedicels 5–12(–22) mm long; male and female flowers on separate plants; flow-
                        ers with petals; capsules 7–7.5 mm wide; one species rare in nc TX _____________ Leptopus
               7. Flowers few to many in spikes or spike-like racemes; leaves 10–112 mm long; seeds
                  1 per locule.
                  10. Leaf blades often but not always rather triangular (sometimes narrowly so) in
                       shape, truncate to cordate or hastate basally; plants with stinging hairs mixed
                       with soft spreading hairs __________________________________________________ Tragia
                  10. Leaf blades variously shaped but not triangular, usually not truncate, cordate, or
                       hastate basally (except cordate in Acalypha ostyifolia); plants without stinging hairs.
                       11. Leaf blades entire; female flowers not surrounded by conspicuous folded
                            bract; stipules absent; some malpighian (= attached at center) hairs usually
                            present ___________________________________________________________ Ditaxis
                       11. Leaf blades toothed; female flowers surrounded by a conspicuous, toothed
                            or lobed, folded bract; stipules present; hairs not malpighian _______________ Acalypha
            6. Inflorescences terminating the stems (may be over-topped by leaves or leafy bracts);
               sap milky or not so.
               12. Sap milky; female flowers exposed _________________________________________ Stillingia
               12. Sap not milky; female flowers ± concealed by a conspicuous, toothed or lobed,
                   folded bract ___________________________________________________________ Acalypha
      4. Flowers lacking a perianth; staminate flowers and a single central pistillate flower together
         congested within small cup-like involucres (= cyathia) which simulate flowers, the cyathia
         with prominent glands and often petal-like appendages on the rim; sap milky.
         13. Leaf bases asymmetrical; leaves all opposite; stems often (but not always) prostrate; main
             stem short, shorter than branches (stems branching basally) ______________________ Chamaesyce
         13. Leaf bases symmetrical; leaves opposite or alternate, but at least some usually alternate;
             stems erect or ascending, not prostrate; main stem prominent, usually longer than
             branches (stem often branching apically) _______________________________________ Euphorbia


                   ACALYPHA COPPERLEAF, THREE-SEEDED MERCURY
 Ours annual or perennial herbs; sap not milky; leaves alternate, petioled; blades entire or
toothed, often turning reddish in fall; stipules minute; inflorescences spicate; staminate and
pistillate flowers on the same or separate plants; staminate flowers: subtended by a small bract;
calyces 4-parted; petals absent; stamens 4–8, united basally; pistillate flowers: each surrounded
by a conspicuous folded bract that is variously toothed or lobed; calyces 3-parted; petals absent;
ovary 3-carpellate; style branches often highly divided; seeds carunculate.
                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   587




 Monotropa hypopithys [BEN]                                              Vaccinium arboreum [SA3]


                                  Monotropa uniflora [ST2]




Acalypha gracilens [ST1]




                              Acalypha monococca [STE]




Acalypha ostryifolia [BB2]                                          Acalypha phleoides [HEA]
588   EUPHORBIACEAE/ACALYPHA

AA genus of ca. 430 species of tropical and warm areas; most species are shrubs with some
trees and herbs. (Greek: acelephe, nettle, alluding to the similarity of the leaves to those of sting-
ing nettle, Urtica dioica L.)

1. Leaf blades deeply divided, small, 5–12 mm long; staminate and pistillate flowers on different
   plants; extreme s part of nc TX ________________________________________________________ A. radians
1. Leaf blades variously toothed but not divided, > 12 mm long (usually much greater); staminate
   and pistillate flowers on the same plant, either on the same OR on separate spikes; widespread
   in nc TX.
   2. Base of leaf blades slightly cordate; leaf blades ovate; staminate and pistillate flowers borne on
      separate spikes _______________________________________________________________ A. ostryifolia
   2. Base of leaf blades not cordate; leaf blades linear-lanceolate to ovate or rhombic; staminate
      and pistillate flowers borne on the same spike.
      3. Spikes terminal; plants perennial _______________________________________________ A. phleoides
      3. Spikes axillary; plants annual.
         4. Fruits 1-seeded __________________________________________________________ A. monococca
         4. Fruits 3-seeded.
            5. Leaf blades linear to lanceolate or narrowly ovate, the margins entire to slightly crenate;
               petiole usually < 1/4 as long as blade ________________________________________ A. gracilens
            5. Leaf blades lanceolate, elliptic, narrowly ovate, or broadly rhombic, the margins crenate
               to serrate; petiole 1/4 the length of blade to as long as blade.
               6. Pistillate bracts (5–)7- to 9-(–11) lobed, the lobes oblong-lanceolate, usually sparsely
                  pubescent (long glandular hairs may be present, but without long, non-glandular
                  hairs); leaf blades ovate or elliptic to broadly rhombic; ______________________ A. rhomboidea
               6. Pistillate bracts with (8–)10–14(–16) lanceolate lobes, usually with dense long-spread-
                  ing hairs; leaf blades narrowly rhombic to broadly lanceolate ___________________ A. virginica

Acalypha gracilens A. Gray, (graceful), SLENDER COPPERLEAF. Erect annual 10–60 cm tall, simple
or freely branched, usually at base; leaf blades linear to lanceolate or narrowly ovate, 4–21 mm
wide; styles 1–2 mm long, white or pinkish. This species is similar to A. monococcabut usually
occurs on deeper soils under more mesic conditions, typically in areas with more vegetation,
usually in sandy soils; Bell and Grayson cos., also Hunt and Lamar cos. (M. Mayfield, pers.
comm.); se and e TX w to ne part of nc TX. Jun–Oct. [A. gracilens A. Gray var. delzii Lill. W. Mill.]

Acalypha monococca (Engelm. ex A. Gray) Lill.W. Mill. & Gandhi, (one-berried), SLENDER ONE-
SEED COPPERLEAF. Erect annual similar to A. gracilens; leaf blades linear to lanceolate, 3–13 mm
wide; fruits with only 1 seed. This species is similar to A. gracilens but usually occurs in areas
with more sun and shallower soils, typically in sandy soils; Grayson and Jack cos.; se and e TX
w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct. [A. gracilens subsp. monococca
(Engelm. ex A. Gray) G.L. Webster, A. gracilens var. monococcaEngelm. ex A. Gray] We are fol-
lowing G. Levin (pers. comm.), who is treating Acalypha for the Flora of North America, in rec-
ognizing this taxon at the specific level; he indicated that there is no evidence of hybridization
with A. gracilens.

Acalypha ostryifolia Riddell, (with leaves resembling Ostrya—hop-hornbeam), HOP-HORNBEAM
COPPERLEAF. Erect annual to 50 cm tall, usually freely branched; leaves long-petioled, nearly gla-
brous, 1.5–5.3 cm wide; pistillate spikes terminal; staminate spikes axillary. Stream banks or bot-
toms, disturbed areas, roadsides; widespread in TX, but mainly nc TX s and w to w TX. Late May–Oct.

Acalypha phleoides Cav., (resembling Phleum—timothy or cat-tail grass), LINDHEIMER’S
COPPERLEAF. Perennial; stems several to many from a woody root, branched, spreading to erect,
to 60 cm long, pilose with long, wide-spreading hairs or short-pubescent with curled hairs or
glabrous; leaf blades lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, sharply and evenly toothed; styles con-
                                                                   CHAMAESYCE/EUPHORBIACEAE      589

spicuously reddish. Rocky slopes, chiefly limestone; Trans-Pecos and Edwards Plateau e and n
to Bell and Somervell cos. (Mahler 1988). May–Oct. [A. lindheimeri Müll.Arg.] We are following
G. Levin (pers. comm.) for nomenclature of this species. He indicated that it will be treated as A.
phleoides in the forthcoming treatment of Acalypha for Flora of North America.

Acalypha radians Torr., (radiating outward), ROUND -CROTON, YERBA DE LA RABIA. Perennial;
stems ± decumbent, 20–40 cm tall, densely pubescent with short stiff and long-spreading hairs;
leaf blades reniform to orbicular, 8–12 mm wide; petioles 4–16 mm long, usually as long as or
longer than blades; bracts 3.5–10 mm long, with 7–13 lobes; capsules with 3 seeds. Dry sandy or
gravelly areas; Burnet Co. (Correll & Johnston 1970), also cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegeta-
tional areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2); extreme s part of nc TX e and s to s TX. Summer–fall.

Acalypha rhomboidea Raf., (rhomboidal, ± diamond-shaped with unequal sides), RHOMBOID
COPPERLEAF. Erect annual 10–60 cm tall; stems simple or freely branched, densely pubescent
above with recurved hairs, sparsely pubescent below; petioles usually 1/2 to as long as blades;
pistillate bracts cut about half way into lobes. Sandy soils; Dallas Co., also Tarrant Co. (Mahler
1988); mainly se TX. Jul–Oct. [A. virginica L. var. rhomboidea (Raf.) Cooperr.] While this species
is cited for vegetational areas 1 through 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), according to M. Mayfield
(pers. comm.), it occurs mainly in se TX; however, the identification of the Dallas specimen was
confirmed by G. Levin. This taxon is sometimes treated as a variety of A. virginica (e.g., Kartesz
1994; Jones et al. 1997). However, we are following G. Levin (pers. comm.), who is treating Aca-
lypha for Flora of North America, in recognizing it at the specific level. According to M.
Mayfield (pers. comm.), A. rhomboidea and A. virginica grow together without intergadation
and are “very distinct species.”

Acalypha virginica L., VIRGINIA COPPERLEAF. Erect annual 10–50 cm tall; stems simple or sparsely
branched; sparsely to densely pubescent with recurved and long, soft, spreading hairs; petioles
usually 1/4–1/2 as long as blades; pistillate bracts cut half or more their length into lobes; styles
white. Sandy open woods or low areas; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also Edwards Pla-
teau. Jul–Oct.

                            CHAMAESYCE CREEPING SPURGE
Annual or perennial herbs; sap milky; leaves opposite, 2-ranked, folding together at night or in
bad weather; leaf blades entire or toothed, usually asymmetrical at base, nearly sessile or short-
petioled; stipules ± scarious or papery, connected or united; cyathia and fruits as in Euphorbia—
flowers greatly reduced, minute, unisexual (consisting only of a single pistil or a single stamen
on a short pedicel), in small cup-like involucres (= cyathia); each cyathium containing one pis-
tillate and several staminate flowers mixed with minute bracts; the cyathia also have fleshy
glands on their rims; these glands in some species have small, petal-like gland-appendages—
the cyanthium is then termed a pseudanthium because of the resemblance to standard flowers;
pistillate pedicel elongating in age, the 3-locular capsule exserted from the involucre. In the
past there has not always been clarity in the terms used for the measurement of glands and
gland-appendages. We are following terminology suggested by M. Mayfield (pers. comm.)—in
the key and descriptions the width of the gland signifies the measurement in the tangential di-
mension relative to the cyathium—in our species this is typically the longest dimension of the
gland; the length of the gland signifies the measurement in the radial dimension relative to the
cyathium; the length of the gland-appendage signifies the measurement in the radial dimen-
sion relative to the cyathium—this means from attachment at the gland to the apex of the
gland-appendage.
AA ± cosmopolitan segregate of Euphorbia; often included in that genus as a subgenus; some
Hawaiian species are arborescent (Wheeler 1941); the genus is estimated to have 300+ species
590   EUPHORBIACEAE/CHAMAESYCE

(M. Mayfield, pers. comm.). 9As in Euphorbia, the latex of some species is apparently toxic and
can cause dermatitis or other reactions in sensitive individuals; inflammation and large blisters
can develop; the eyes are particularly sensitive. While livestock are supposedly sometimes acci-
dentally poisoned by eating Chamaesyce species mixed with other species, animals generally
will not eat the plants (Wheeler 1941; Muenscher 1951; Kingsbury 1964; Lampe 1986). Because
pubescence, stipule, fruit, and seed characters are critical in determining species of
Chamaesyce, a hand lens is essential. While Jones et al. (1997) lumped Chamaesyce with Eu-
phorbia, we are following Kartesz (1994), Webster (1994b), J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997), and G.
Webster (pers. comm. 1997) in maintaining it as a separate genus. (Ancient Greek name for a
kind of prostrate plant; presumably involving the root chamai, on the ground or low growing)
REFERENCES: Wheeler 1941; Burch 1966.

1. Capsules, ovaries, underside of leaf blades, and usually stems glabrous.
   2. Larger leaf blades linear or narrowly oblong, 4.5–10 times as long as wide _________________ C. missurica
   2. Larger leaf blades oblong or elliptic to triangular or orbicular, less than 4.5 times as long as
      wide.
      3. Larger leaves 13–35(–rarely more) mm long (including petioles); plants ascending, 15–75
         cm tall.
            4. Capsules 1.9–2.3 mm long; branches off main stem 1–4 mm thick; cyathia in small
               clusters or solitary; leaf blades often with a central reddish or purplish splotch; stems
               pubescent in lines; native species widespread and abundant in nc TX ________________ C. nutans
            4. Capsules ca. 1.3 mm long; branches off main stem ca. 1 mm thick; cyathia mostly strongly
               and densely clustered in glomerules; leaf blades usually without reddish or purplish
               splotch; stems glabrous; in nc TX known only as introduced weed in Tarrant Co. ___ C. hypericifolia
      3. Larger leaves 4–13 mm long; plants usually prostrate or nearly so (except sometimes as-
         cending in C. fendleri and C. glyptosperma), usually 1–10 cm tall.
         5. Stipules united into a single, triangular, entire or ragged-margined, white scale on each
            side of the stem; stems often rooting at nodes.
            6. Cyathial glands 0.5–1 mm wide (tangential dimension; oblong in shape, the length
               or radial dimension much less); gland-appendages usually conspicuous, 0.8–1.5 mm
               long (radial dimension), 1–3 times wider than glands are wide (tangential dimen-
               sion); plants perennial; staminate flowers 12–30 per cyathia; capsules 1.3–2.3 mm
               long _____________________________________________________________ C. albomarginata
            6. Cyathial glands < 0.4 mm wide (oblong in shape, the length or radial dimension
               much less); gland-appendages usually inconspicuous, 0.2–0.6 mm long, about as
               wide as the glands; plants annual; staminate flowers 3–8(–10) per cyathia; capsules
               1–1.2 mm long ___________________________________________________________ C. serpens
         5. Stipules cut into linear segments, or reduced to a linear-lanceolate, not noticably white
            segment; stems not rooting at nodes.
            7. Plants annual from a taproot; gland-appendages white or pink; stems usually prostrate
               or nearly so.
               8. Leaf blades oblong-ovate to orbicular, less than twice as long as wide; petioles
                  absent or very short, usually less than 1 mm long; gland-appendages 0.75–1.2
                  mm long (radial dimension), showy ________________________________________ C. cordifolia
               8. Leaf blades oblong or oblong-elliptic, twice as long as wide or longer; petioles of
                  larger leaves up to 1.3 mm long; gland-appendages 0.5–0.75 mm long, not par-
                  ticularly showy.
                  9. Seeds transversely ridged; leaves usually minutely toothed at least near apex
                     (under a hand lens); gland-appendages usually wider than long (tangential
                     dimension greater than radial dimension) ____________________________ C. glyptosperma
                  9. Seeds smooth; leaves usually entire; gland-appendages usually longer than wide ____ C. geyeri
                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS      591




                         Acalypha rhomboidea [ST1]                              Acalypha virginica [BB2]




Acalypha radians [HEA]                    Chamaesyce albomarginata [HEA, RHO]




                             Chamaesyce angusta [BOI, RHO]
592   EUPHORBIACEAE/CHAMAESYCE

           7. Plants perennial from branching roots; gland-appendages absent or yellow-green
              to red-brown (rarely white); stems prostrate to spreading or ascending ______________ C. fendleri
1. Capsules, ovaries, underside of leaf blades, and stems sparsely to densely pubescent.
   10. Upper leaf blades linear or nearly so, > 9 times as long as wide; plants erect perennials from
       woody taproots; rare in nc TX, known locally only from the Lampasas Cut Plain _____________ C. angusta
   10. Upper leaf blades variously shaped but not linear, ca. 1–6 times as long as wide; plants annual
       or perennial, prostrate to erect; including species common and widespread in nc TX.
       11. Larger leaf blades oblong to oblong-elliptic or oblong-obovate; stems prostrate to erect;
           including species common and widespread in nc TX.
           12. Leaf blades ca. 3 cm long or longer _____________________________________________ C. hirta
           12. Leaf blades 1 cm long or less.
               13. Styles bifid for from 1/4 to nearly their entire length; leaf blades usually toothed,
                    but neither prominently nor sharply, glabrous on upper surface or sparsely pu-
                    bescent with hairs up to 0.5 mm long; seeds transversely rugose; stem hairs 0.2–
                    0.7 mm long, sometimes with a few scattered longer ones.
                    14. Capsules loosely appressed-pubescent, the hairs rather uniformly scattered
                        over the surface; leaf blades often with reddish or purplish central splotch;
                        pubescence of ter minal internodes loosely upwardly appressed ___________ C. maculata
                    14. Capsules spreading-pubescent, the hairs mainly on the angles of the cap-
                        sules; leaf blades without reddish or purplish central splotch; pubescence of
                        terminal internodes widely spreading or reflexed ________________________ C. prostrata
               13. Styles unbranched; leaf blades prominently and sharply toothed, at least near apex,
                    sparsely to densely pubescent above with hairs 0.5–1.3 mm long; seeds punctately
                    pitted and mottled; stem hairs 0.4–1.5 mm long __________________________ C. stictospora
       11. Larger leaf blades broadly or narrowly triangular; stems spreading to erect; rare, only in s
           part of nc TX.
           15. Stems and leaf blades with long (ca. 0.8–1.5 mm), conspicuous, soft hairs visible to
                the naked eye; leaf blades broadly triangular, thin, reddish or brownish beneath, with
                margins flat; styles bifid, the divisions terete, not reddish; capsules 1.3–1.9(–2.1) mm
                long; seeds 1–1.3 mm long _________________________________________________ C. villifera
           15. Stems and leaf blades with very short (< 0.2 mm long), stiff hairs invisible to the
                naked eye; leaf blades narrowly triangular, thick, gray-green or blue-green, with mar-
                gins inrolled downward; styles bifid, the divisions clavate, deep red; capsules 1.9–
                2.3 mm long; seeds 1.5–1.8 mm long ____________________________________________ C. lata

Chamaesyce albomarginata (Torr. & A. Gray) Small, (white-margined), WHITE-MARGIN EUPHOR-
BIA. Prostrate, mat-forming perennial; leaf blades orbicular to oblong, entire; styles bifid nearly
to base. Stream bottoms, roadsides, disturbed areas; Callahan, Coleman, Cooke, Shackelford, and
Young cos.; nc TX s and w to w TX. Late Apr–Oct. [Euphorbia albomarginata Torr. & A. Gray]
According to M. Mayfield (pers. comm.), this species is found almost exclusively w of the West
Cross Timbers; the Cooke Co. specimen, identified by M. Mayfield, is the easternmost record of
which we are aware.

Chamaesyce angusta (Engelm.) Small, (narrow), BLACK-FOOT EUPHORBIA. Perennial; stems erect,
6–50 from a woody crown, 10–45 cm tall; leaf blades entire; lower leaf blades elliptic to linear-
oblong, 7–25(–38) mm long; higher leaf blades narrower, linear, > 9 times as long as wide;
stipules minute, distinct; cyathia at the upper nodes, solitary; gland-appendages white, 2–3
times as wide as gland width; styles bifid only at apex or 1/3 the distance to the base.
Comanche Co. (Wheeler 1941), also Burnet Co. on the s margin of nc TX (Balcones
Canyonlands Nat. Wildlife Refuge, C. Sexton, pers. comm.); also Travis Co. just s of nc TX
                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   593




Chamaesyce cordifolia [HEA, RHO]




 Chamaesyce fendleri [BB2, RHO]




  Chamaesyce geyeri [BB2, RHO]
594   EUPHORBIACEAE/CHAMAESYCE

(Correll & Johnston 1970); mainly Edwards Plateau to Trans-Pecos; endemic to TX. Spring–fall.
[Euphorbia angusta Engelm.] E

Chamaesyce cordifolia (Elliott) Small, (with heart-shaped leaves), HEART-LEAF SPURGE, HEART-
LEAF EUPHORBIA. Usually prostrate annual; stems to 65 cm long; leaf blades entire; styles bifid to
base. Loose sandy soils, open woods; Denton, Henderson, Limestone, and Tarrant cos.; se and e
TX w to East Cross Timbers. Jun–Oct. [Euphorbia cordifolia Elliott]

Chamaesyce fendleri (Torr. & A. Gray) Small, (for August Fendler, 1813–1883, one of the first
botanists to collect in New Mexico and Venezuela). Perennial; stems rather wiry, prostrate to
spreading or ascending, to 20 cm long; roots becoming woody; leaf blades orbicular-ovate to
oblong, entire, acute; styles bifid at least 1/2 their length. Rocky or sandy soils; Bell, Bosque, and
Tarrant cos., also Brown and Hamilton cos. (HPC); w part of nc TX s and w to Edwards Plateau
and Trans-Pecos. Apr–Jun, sporadically later. [Euphorbia fendleri Torr. & A. Gray]

Chamaesyce geyeri (Engelm.) Small, (for its discoverer Carl Andreas Geyer, 1809–1853, Austrian
botanist), GEYER’S EUPHORBIA. Annual; stems prostrate; gland-appendages usually longer than
wide, 0.5–0.75 mm long, acute or obtuse, usually entire; styles bifid 1/3–1/2 their length. Sandy
open woods, disturbed areas; Hood and Parker cos. in West Cross Timbers; mainly Plains Coun-
try and Trans-Pecos. Jun–Oct. [Euphorbia geyeri Engelm.]

Chamaesyce glyptosperma (Engelm.) Small, (carved seed), RIDGE-SEED EUPHORBIA. Annual;
stems ascending to decumbent, rarely prostrate, to 50 cm long; leaf blades finely toothed to-
wards apex; gland-appendages usually wider than long, 0.1–0.6 mm long, usually with uneven
or shallowly toothed or lobed margin; styles bifid ca. 1/3–1/2 their length. Mostly sandy soils,
stream bottoms, open woods, and disturbed areas; widespread in TX, in nc TX mainly East
Cross Timbers westward, locally to the e in Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988). Late May–Oct. [Euphorbia
glyptospermaEngelm.]

Chamaesyce hirta (L.) Millsp., (hairy), PILL-POD EUPHORBIA. Pubescent annual with flowering
stems erect; stems with long, yellowish, jointed hairs; leaves ca. 3 cm long, elliptic-oblong; peti-
oles 1–2 mm long; styles bifid 1/2–2/3 their length. Weed in flower bed; Dallas Co., also coastal
Texas. Reported as new for TX by Lipscomb (1984). Jun. [Euphorbia hirta L.] Native to Africa.
Used as an arrow poison ingredient in Zaire and medicinally in many countries in Africa
(Neuwinger 1996); reportedly causes cardiac and respiratory depression (Burlage 1968). 9 I

Chamaesyce hypericifolia (L.) Millsp., (with leaves like Hypericum—St. John’s wort), TROPICAL
EUPHORBIA. Plant to ca. 50 cm; main stem erect, the plant thus resembling C. nutans; branches
erect to ascending; leaves usually without a central reddish or purplish splotch; glomerules of
cyathia conspicuous, the gland-appendages white to pinkish; styles bifid to about the middle.
Weed along sidewalks, and in flower gardens, nurseries, and landscapes; Tarrant Co. (intro-
duced weed in Ft. Worth); first seen in Tarrant Co. in 1994 and now spreading; mainly s TX.
Summer. Native to extreme s TX. [Euphorbia hypericifolia L.]

Chamaesyce lata (Engelm.) Small, (broad, wide), HOARY EUPHORBIA. Perennial < 20 cm tall, rhi-
zomatous, the rhizomes slender; plant mostly glabrous or stems and leaves with pubescence;
stems subdecumbent or spreading, to 35 cm long; leaf blades minutely pubescent, entire, less
than 12 mm long; styles bifid nearly to base. Sandy or rocky soils; Coleman, Coryell (Wheeler
1941), Erath, and Hamilton (Stanford 1976) cos.; mainly Plains Country and Edwards Plateau w
to Trans-Pecos. [Euphorbia lata Englem.] According to M. Mayfield (pers. comm.), this species is
found almost exclusively w of the West Cross Timbers.

Chamaesyce maculata (L.) Small, (spotted, from the spot on the leaf), SPOTTED EUPHORBIA, SPOT-
TED SPURGE. Prostrate or rarely suberect annual, not rooting at the nodes; stems to 50 cm long;
                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS   595




       Chamaesyce glyptosperma [BB2, RHO]                Chamaesyce hirta [BB2, RHO]




Chamaesyce hypericifolia [BR2]              Chamaesyce lata [BB2, RHO]




           Chamaesyce maculata [REE, RHO]                Chamaesyce missurica [GLE, RHO]
596   EUPHORBIACEAE/CNIDOSCOLUS

leaf blades finely toothed, oblong, often with a reddish or purplish central splotch; gland-ap-
pendages white to red; styles bifid 1/4–1/3 their length. Sandy soils, stream banks, woods, dis-
turbed sites; throughout most of TX. [C. supina (Raf.) Moldenke, Euphorbia maculata L.,
Euphorbia supina Raf.] Reported to be toxic to livestock; when injested by sheep, photosensiti-
zation, swelling of the head, and emaciation can result (Burlage 1968). 9

Chamaesyce missurica (Raf.) Shinners, (of Missouri), PRAIRIE SPURGE, MISSOURI SPURGE. Annual
with erect main stem to 1 m tall and wide-spreading branches to 50 cm or more long; leaves
with short petioles 1–3.2 mm long; leaf blades linear to oblong, 1–5 mm wide, 4.7–14 times as
long as wide, symmetrical or slightly asymmetrical at base, entire; gland-appendages white
(rarely pinkish), prominent, ca. 0.5–2.5 mm long; styles bifid 1/2 their length. Loose sandy soils,
limestone outcrops; throughout TX e of Trans-Pecos. Late May–Oct. [C. missurica (Raf.)
Shinners var. calcicola Shinners, Euphorbia missurica Raf.]

Chamaesyce nutans (Lag.) Small, (nodding), EYEBANE. Annual with (1)–several low-spreading to
erect stems to 1 m long; stems pubescent in lines; gland-appendages white to red; leaf blades
asymmetrically oblong, often with a central reddish or purplish splotch; styles bifid ca. 1/2
their length. Stream bottoms, roadsides, and disturbed soils; throughout TX. May–Oct. The
name C. maculata has often been incorrectly applied to this species. [C. maculata of authors,
not (L.) Small, Euphorbia maculata of authors, not L., E. nutans Lag.] Toxic and has caused
death in lambs through photosenstization (Kingsbury 1964); the common name also suggests
that care should be taken with this species. 9

Chamaesyce prostrata (Aiton) Small, (prostrate, flat to the ground), PROSTRATE EUPHORBIA. An-
nual similar to C. maculata; leaf blades varying to broadly elliptic, without central reddish or
purplish splotch; styles bifid to base or nearly so. Stream banks, prairies, disturbed sites, chiefly
clay soils; throughout most of TX. Jun–Oct, sporadically earlier. [Euphorbia prostrata Aiton, Eu-
phorbia chamaesyce of authors, not. L.] Can be toxic to cattle (Kingsbury 1964). 9

Chamaesyce serpens (Kunth) Small, (crawling), MAT EUPHORBIA, HIERBA DE GOLONDRINA. An-
nual resembling C. albomarginata; stems slender, almost thread-like, often rooting at the nodes;
styles notched. Stream bottoms, prairies, clay flats, disturbed sites; throughout TX. Jul–Oct. [Eu-
phorbia serpens Kunth]

Chamaesyce stictospora (Engelm.) Small, (straight seed), SLIM-SEED EUPHORBIA. Annual; stems
prostrate, to 30 cm long; leaf blades varying to broadly elliptic, without central red spot; styles
unbranched. Limestone slopes, prairies, disturbed sites, clay soils; mainly East Cross Timbers s
and w to w TX, locally e to Dallas Co. Jun–Oct. [Euphorbia stictospora Engelm.]

Chamaesyce villifera (Scheele) Small, (bearing soft hairs), HAIRY EUPHORBIA. Perennial but flow-
ering the first year, commonly behaving as an annual; stems ascending to erect, to 40 cm tall;
leaf blades entire or very minutely toothed, 3–10 mm long; styles bifid 1/2–2/3 their length.
Limestone slopes, dry uplands; Bell Co.; s part of nc TX s to Edwards Plateau, also Trans-Pecos.
Late May–Oct. [Euphorbia villifera Scheele]

                     CNIDOSCOLUS BULL-NETTLE, MALA MUJER
AA mainly tropical American genus of ca. 75 species, often with stinging hairs. The leaves of
some species are eaten as greens. (Greek: cnide, nettle, and scolopes, prickle or sting, alluding to
the stinging hairs)
REFERENCE: McVaugh 1944.

Cnidoscolus texanus (Müll.Arg.) Small, (of Texas), TEXAS BULL-NETTLE, MALA MUJER, TREAD -
SOFTLY. Perennial with milky sap, to 80(–100) cm tall from a large (to 20 cm thick), deep,
                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS    597




Chamaesyce nutans [ REE, RHO]                                  Chamaesyce prostrata [BR2]




                  Chamaesyce serpens [BB2, RHO]




                  Chamaesyce stictospora [BT3, RHO]
598   EUPHORBIACEAE/CROTON

branching root; stems densely and leaves more sparsely hispid with pale, extremely painful,
stinging hairs; leaves alternate, long-petioled; leaf blades ca. 6–15 cm wide, cordate, palmately
deeply 3–5-lobed, the lobes coarsely toothed or again lobed; stipules inconspicuous, narrow,
toothed; flowers in terminal, cymose, pedunculate inflorescences slightly shorter to slightly
longer than the leaves; male and female flowers in the same inflorescence; perianth large, white,
showy, sweet-scented, of a single whorl of parts; perianth of male flowers with subcylindrical
tube 15–20 mm long, slightly longer than the (4–)5 subrotate lobes; perianth of female flowers
10–17 mm long, 5-parted essentially to base; capsules 15–20 mm long, hispid, with 3 large seeds,
14–18 mm long. Sandy open woods, fields, disturbed areas; nearly throughout TX. Apr–Jul, less
freely to Sep. [Jatropha texana Müll.Arg.] The seeds are reported to be edible; however, there are
reports that they may contain some cyanide. If the foliage is touched, glass-like hairs break off
in the skin and act like hypodermic needles; they release a toxin which causes an intense burn-
ing sensation; this type of effect is known as contact urticaria; the stinging hairs can penetrate
even heavy clothing such as jeans; subsequent to the sting, the affected skin can be red, swollen,
and irritated for a number of days. According to Lampe (1986), only four families
(Euphorbiaceae, Hydrophyllaceae, Loasaceae, and Urticaceae) have stinging hairs—nc TX has
stinging representatives of all of these except the Hydrophyllaceae. 9 m/85

                                                  CROTON
Ours annual or perennial, often aromatic herbs or shrubs with stellate hairs or peltate scales on
the epidermis of at least some parts; sap not milky; leaves alternate or subopposite, or those
under the flowers apparently whorled, entire or toothed; stipules small, usually falling early;
flowers solitary or in spike-like racemes or head-like clusters, unisexual, the sexes on the same
or separate plants; staminate flowers with (4–)5(–6) sepals united at base; petals as many or
none; stamens 5–20; pistillate flowers with 5–6(–9) sepals united at or near base; petals minute
or none; pistil 1, usually 3-carpellate; fruit a 1- to usually 3-seeded, globose or subglobose cap-
sule, or in C. michauxii an achene.
AA huge genus (ca. 750 species) of tropical and warm areas ranging from temperate herbs to
tropical rain forest trees. Oil of croton, one of the most purgative substances known, is obtained
from an Old World species, C. tiglium L. Many contain alkaloids and are used medicinally; an
Ecuadorian species is currently being investigated for medicinal uses. Croton species are dis-
tasteful and rarely eaten by livestock; they thus increase under overgrazing; 9some species are
toxic. The widely cultivated horticultural “crotons” with variegated foliage belong to the
Euphorbiaceae genus Codiaeum, a group of 15 species native from Malesia to the Pacific. (Greek:
croton, a tick; the Greek name of the CASTOR-OIL-PLANT of this family, from similarity of the
seed to a tick)
REFERENCES: Ferguson 1901; Johnston 1959; Ginzbarg 1992; Webster 1992, 1993; Aplet et al. 1994.

1. Leaf blades serrate; small, distinctive, whitish, saucer-shaped gland present on each side of the
   undersurface of the base of the leaf blade where the petiole attaches (use hand lens) ______ C. glandulosus
1. Leaf blades usually entire or rarely minutely serrate; leaf glands not present.
   2. Plants shrubby, the stems woody; in nc TX known only from Coryell, Bell, and Johnson cos.
      3. Upper and lower surfaces of mature leaf blades strikingly different in appearance, the up-
         per green and essentially glabrous (rarely a few scales present), the lower silvery-white with
         reddish brown tinge due to it being covered with silvery-white peltate scales (some red-
         dish brown), the actual leaf surface not visible; leaf blades obtuse ___________________ C. alabamensis
      3. Upper and lower surfaces of mature leaf blades with stellate pubescence, more dense on
         lower surface, the upper surface green, the lower grayish green; leaf blades acute _______ C. fruticulosus
   2. Plants herbaceous, the stems not woody; widespread in nc TX.
      4. Leaf blades with markedly different types of indumentum above and below, stellate-pu-
                                                                               CROTON/EUPHORBIACEAE         599

       bescent above, stellate-scaly beneath (scales silvery or brownish); leaf blades 8 mm wide
       or less (often considerably less); calyces ca. 1 mm long; fruit an achene to ca. 3 mm long; not
       collected in nc TX since 1882 ___________________________________________________ C. michauxii
    4. Leaf blades with similarly coated upper and lower surfaces, both pubescent or both scaly
       (upper sometimes much less so than lower); leaf blades variable, often > 8 mm wide; caly-
       ces usually > 1 mm long; fruit a capsule 4–9 mm long; widespread in nc TX.
       5. Plants dioecious; all flowers without petals; leaf blades 15–35 mm long, to only 10(–12)
          mm wide, usually 4–5 times as long as wide ______________________________________ C. texensis
       5. Plants monoecious; at least the staminate flowers with petals; leaf blades usually either
          longer, wider, or < 4 times as long as wide.
          6. Styles 2, the ultimate branches 4; mature capsules 1-seeded; leaf blades 10–25 mm
             long ___________________________________________________________ C. monanthogynus
          6. Styles 3, the ultimate branches 6 or more; mature capsules 3-seeded; leaf blades 10–
             80(–100) mm long.
             7. Ultimate style branches 6; pistillate sepals subtending mature fruits 4–5 mm long;
                leaf blades suborbicular (typically) to oblong-lanceolate, often obtuse at apex
                  ______________________________________________________________ C. lindheimerianus
             7. Ultimate style branches ca. 10 or more; pistillate sepals subtending mature fruits 5–
                10 mm long; leaf blades ovate to lance-elliptic, often acute at apex ______________ C. capitatus

DCroton alabamensis E.A. Sm. ex Chapm. var. texensis Ginzbarg, (sp.: of Alabama; var.: of
Texas), TEXABAMA CROTON. Monoecious shrub to ca. 2 m or more tall; younger leaves and young
twigs more reddish brown due to greater number of pigmented scales; inflorescence a terminal
6–14-flowered raceme. Limestone canyon slopes, in understory of forests or in full sun; endemic
to Coryell and Travis cos. (narrowly endemic to nc TX and immediately adjacent area); first dis-
covered in 1989; recently described by Ginzbarg (1992). Aplet et al. (1994) gave additional infor-
mation. Feb–Mar. The only other variety, variety alabamensis, is known only from 3 cos. in Ala-
bama and Tennessee. (TOES 1993: V) mE
Croton capitatus Michx., (capitate, headed), WOOLLY CROTON, HOGWORT. Monoecious annual
herb to 0.2–1(–1.5) m tall, densely stellate tomentose; leaf blades usually acute to obtuse; flowers
in terminal spike-like racemes; styles 3, two or three times 2-parted. Sandy or calcareous prai-
ries, pastures, roadsides. Jun–Oct. While generally avoided, cattle can be poisoned by eating the
plant fresh or in hay (Boughton 1931; Muenscher 1951). 9
1. Petioles of middle and upper leaves ca. equal; leaf blades often blunt, not strongly tapered from
   base; seeds uniform in color _______________________________________________________ var. capitatus
1. Petioles decreasing in length from middle of stem upward; leaf blades mostly acute, strongly
   tapered from base; seeds mottled ________________________________________________ var. lindheimeri

var. capitatus. Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant cos., also Denton (J. Quayle, pers. comm.), Fannin,
and Clay cos. (Johnston 1959); also ne TX and Rolling Plains.

var. lindheimeri (Engelm. & A. Gray) Müll.Arg., (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879,
German born TX botanist). Hunt and Denton cos., also Johnson, Kaufman, Hill, Limestone, and
McLennan cos. (Johnston 1959); se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau.

Croton fruticulosus Torr., (shrubby and dwarf), ENCINILLA, HIERBA LOCA. Monoecious shrub to
ca. 1 m tall; flowers in terminal racemes. In brush on limestone uplands; Bell Co., also Johnson
(R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) and Williamson (Johnston 1959) cos. and Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell
cos.—Sanchez 1997); w part of nc TX s to Edwards Plateau, also Trans-Pecos. May–fall.

Croton glandulosus L., (glandular), TROPIC CROTON. Monoecious annual, normally erect, to 60
cm tall, widely branched, stellate-pubescent; gland present on each side of the undersurface of
600   EUPHORBIACEAE/DITAXIS

the base of the leaf blade where the petiole attaches; capsules 4.5–5.5 mm long. Stream bottoms
or disturbed habitats. Jun–Oct.
1. Plants ca. 10–20 cm tall; stellate hairs on stem with central branch usually shorter than radials;
   larger leaves about 2.5 cm long; glands at base of leaf blade 0.1–0.4 mm thick apically ______ var. lindheimeri
1. Plants usually > 25 cm tall; stellate hairs on stem with a long, erect, central branch usually longer
   than radials; larger leaves over 3 cm long; glands at base of leaf blade 0.5–0.8 mm thick apically
     ________________________________________________________________________ var. septentrionalis

var. lindheimeri Müll.Arg., (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, German born TX bota-
nist), LINDHEIMER’S CROTON. Clay and Tarrant cos., also Bell, Erath, and Parker cos. (Johnston
1959); widespread in TX.

var. septentrionalis Müll.Arg., (northern), NORTHERN CROTON. Se and e TX w to Rolling Plains
and e Edwards Plateau.

Croton lindheimerianus Scheele, (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, German born TX
botanist), THREE-SEED CROTON. Monoecious annual; leaf blades densely stellate pubescent,
thick, usually obtuse to acute; the 3 styles bifid to base. Sandy ground; widespread but local
over much of TX, in nc TX mainly in West Cross Timbers (Archer, Clay, Eastland, Jack, Palo
Pinto, and Young cos.), also to the e in Grayson Co. (RR yard). Jul–Oct.

Croton michauxii G.L. Webster, (for André Michaux, 1746–1803, French botanist and explorer of
North America), NARROW-LEAF RUSHFOIL. Erect, slender, loosely branched, monoecious annual
to 60(–90) cm tall; stems coated with stellate hairs, the rays of which are united at the base and
therefore scale-like, silvery or brownish; leaves alternate or subopposite, very short-petioled;
leaf blades linear-lanceolate to oblong-elliptic; flowers minute, unisexual, both sexes on the
same plant; staminate flowers: in slender, short, terminal, minutely bracted spikes; sepals 3–5;
petals as many, narrower, white; pistillate flowers: mostly solitary at base of staminate spikes;
calyces unequally 3–5-lobed; petals absent; style branches 3, inconspicuously bifrucate near
apex; fruit an achene 2.5–3 mm long. Sandy open areas; collected at Dallas by Reverchon in
1882; mainly e TX. Jun–Oct. This taxon, previously treated as [Crotonopsislinearis Michx.], was
recently lumped into the genus Croton (Webster 1992). According to Webster (1992), “… the
main generic character of Crotonopsis—unicarpellate gynoecium and indehiscent fruit—repre-
sents merely the end-point in a reduction series from the 3-carpellate gynoecium of most Cro-
ton species through the 2-carpellate gynoecium of Croton monanthogynusMichx. to the 1-car-
pellate gynoecium of Crotonopsis. Consequetly, there appears to be a much stronger case for
treating Crotonopsisas a section of Croton than as an independent genus.” [not C. linearis Jacq.]

Croton monanthogynus Michx., (one female flower), DOVEWEED, PRAIRIE-TEA, ONE-SEED CROTON.
Closely stellate pubescent monoecious annual to 50 cm tall, widely branched; leaf blades
rhombic-ovate to elliptic or lanceolate; capsules ca. 4 mm long. Rocky or eroding ground, road-
sides and waste places, particularly calcareous soils; throughout most of TX. Jun–Nov.

Croton texensis (Klotzsch) Müll.Arg., (of Texas), TEXAS CROTON, SKUNKWEED. Dioecious annual
herb 20–80 cm tall; leaf blades linear-lanceolate to nearly ovate-oblong, usually 15–35 mm
long, (3–)4–5(–6) times as long as wide, to ca. 10(–12) mm wide, densely stellate pubescent, more
so below; calyces 2–4 mm across; capsules 4–6 mm long, globose to globose-ovoid, often
slightly warty, stellate-tomentose. Sand or sandy loam; widespread in TX. Jun–Oct. While gen-
erally avoided, cattle can be poisoned by eating the plant fresh or in hay (Muenscher 1951). 9

                                      DITAXIS WILD MERCURY
Perennials, herbaceous from a woody crown, with pubescence of hairs attached at the middle (=
malpighian); sap not milky; foliage sometimes darkening upon drying; leaves alternate; leaf
                                                                                       ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS    601




                                  Chamaesyce villifera [HEA]                                           Cnidoscolus texanus [BT3]




   Croton alabamensis var. texensis [SID]           Croton capitatus var. lindheimeri [ARM]            Croton fruticulosus [ARM]




Croton glandulosus var. septentrionalis [ARM]           Croton lindheimerianus [ARM]                    Croton michauxii [MIC ]
602   EUPHORBIACEAE/DITAXIS

blades entire; inflorescences racemose, axillary; flowers unisexual; staminate flowers: sepals 5;
petals 5; glands 5; stamens 7–10, the filaments coherent; pistillate flowers: sepals 5; petals 5 or
absent; glands 5, ovary 3-carpellate; ovules 1 per cell; styles 3, bifid; capsules 3-seeded; seeds
ecarunculate.
AAn American genus of 40–50 species ranging from the U.S. to Argentina (Webster 1994a).
The species have often been treated in a broadly circumscribed Argythamnia (e.g., Correll &
Johnston 1970; Ingram 1980; Hatch et al. 1990; Kartesz 1994). However, we are following Webster
(1994b) who considered Ditaxis a distinct genus, as did Takahashi et al. (1995) and Steinmann
and Felger (1997). According to Takahashi et al. (1995), Ditaxis “. . . has pollen that can be easily
distinguished from all remaining Euphorbiaceae (and probably from all dicotyledons) by the
unusual aperture configuration and the shape of the grain.” If treated broadly to include
Chiropetalum and Ditaxis , Argythamnia is an American, mainly tropical genus of 78–88 spe-
cies. (Greek: di, two, separate, and taxis, arrangement, presumably in reference to the separate
male and female flowers)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1956c; Ingram 1967, 1980; Waterfall 1971 [1972]; Webster 1994b; Takahashi
et al. 1995.

1. Inflorescences shorter than leaves; plants with much-branched, trailing or spreading stems _______ D. humilis
1. Inflorescences longer than leaves; plants with several, unbranched, erect to ascending stems.
   2. Glands of pistillate and staminate flowers truncate, square to rectangular ________________ D. aphoroides
   2. Glands of pistillate and staminate flowers acute, linear ______________________________ D. mercurialina

Ditaxis aphoroides (Müll.Arg.) Pax, (resembling Aphora, a generic synonym used by Nuttall),
HILL COUNTRY WILD MERCURY, SHRUBBY DITAXIS. Plant densely villous; stems usually erect; leaves
elliptic to ovate, sessile above, veins prominent below; usually dioecious; staminate flowers: pet-
als obovate to cuneate, ca. 4–5 mm long; glands wider than long, truncate; stamens 8-10; pistil-
late flowers: petals absent or rudimentary; glands thick, squarish, truncate; styles erect, bifid
half the free length. Sandy or rocky limestone soils; Brown Co., also Mills Co. (TOES 1993); also
on Edwards Plateau in Blanco, Gillespie and Kerr cos., also Bandera, Kimble (HPC), Hays,
Kendall (Mahler 1988), Comal, and Uvalde (R. Roberts, pers. comm.) cos.; current populations
not known from Brown, Hays, or Kendall cos. (Mahler 1988); Reverchon’s collection from Will-
iams Ranch (reportedly in Brown Co.—Apr 1882) represents the most n collection; narrowly en-
demic to Edwards Plateau and the sw part of nc TX. Mar–Apr. [Argythamnia aphoroides
Müll.Arg.] (TOES 1993: V) m E

Ditaxis humilis (Engelm. & A. Gray) Pax var. humilis, (low-growing, dwarf), LOW WILD MERCURY,
LOW DITAXIS. Stems usually trailing or spreading; leaves sparsely to densely villous, elliptic to
narrowly obovate, sessile or nearly so above, with veins prominent on lower surface; monoe-
cious; staminate flowers: petals narrowly lanceolate to oblanceolate; glands linear; stamens 8 or
9; pistillate flowers: petals to 0.5 mm long or absent; glands linear; styles erect and bifid half the
free length. Rocky or disturbed calcareous clay soils; throughout much of TX, mainly Black-
land Prairie s and w to w TX. Apr–Oct. [Argythamnia humilis (Engelm. & A. Gray) Müll.Arg.]

var. leiosperma Waterfall, (smooth-seeded), was named in the genus Argythamnia by Waterfall
(1971 [1972]) apparently based on a single seed character (the name has apparently not been
recognized in Ditaxis ). It seems better lumped with var. humilis. Kartesz (1994) recognized the
variety but it was not recognized by Jones et al. (1997) nor more recently by Kartesz (pers.
comm., 1997). The two can be separated as follows:

1. Seeds with distinctly rugose-roughened areas ___________________________________________ var. humilis
1. Seeds basically smooth, with several whitish slighly roughened encircling bands ____________ var. leiosperma

var. laevis (Torr.) A. Heller, (smooth), SMOOTH WILD MERCURY, SMOOTH DITAXIS, with foliage en-
                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS     603




                                       Croton texensis [ARM]


     Croton monanthogynus [GLE]




                                     Ditaxis humilis var. humilis [BB1, BT3]




Ditaxis aphoroides [HEA]




                                       Ditaxis mercurialina [EN1]
604   EUPHORBIACEAE/EUPHORBIA

tirely glabrous, rather succulent, and becoming brittle upon drying, is known from the
Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. [Argythamnia humilis var. laevis (Torr.) Shinners]

Ditaxis mercurialina (Nutt.) J.M.Coult., (Mercury, messenger of the gods), TALL WILD MERCURY,
TALL DITAXIS. Plant dark green, villous; monoecious; staminate flowers: petals oblanceolate to
broadly so, ca. 3 mm long; glands linear; stamens usually 8; pistillate flowers: petals usually ab-
sent; glands linear; styles spreading, bifid near apex only. Sandy or rocky limestone soils, prai-
ries; Bell, Collin, Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant cos.; nc TX w to Rolling Plains and sw to Edwards
Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Apr–Jun. [Aphora mercurialina Nutt., Argythamnia mercurialina
(Nutt.) Müll.Arg.]

                                   EUPHORBIA SPURGE
Annuals or perennials with milky sap; leaves alternate or opposite; stipules absent, or repre-
sented by minute glands; inflorescences dichotomously or trichotomously branched, with al-
ternate or whorled leafy bracts; cyathia and fruits as in Chamaesyce—flowers greatly reduced,
minute, unisexual (consisting only of a single pistil or a single stamen on a short pedicel), in
small cup-like involucres (= cyathia); each cyathium containing one pistillate and several
staminate flowers mixed with minute bracts; the cyathia also have fleshy glands on their rims;
these glands in some species have small, petal-like gland-appendages—the cyanthium is then
termed a pseudanthium because of the resemblance to standard flowers; pistillate pedicel elon-
gating in age, the 3-locular capsule exserted from the involucre. In the past there has not always
been clarity in the terms used for the measurement of glands and gland-appendages. We are
following terminology suggested by M. Mayfield (pers. comm.)—in the key and descriptions the
width of the gland signifies the measurement in the tangential dimension relative to the
cyathium; the length of the gland signifies the measurement in the radial dimension relative to
the cyathium; the length of the gland-appendage signifies the measurement in the radial di-
mension relative to the cyathium—this means from attachment at the gland to the apex of the
gland-appendage.
AWhen considered broadly, Euphorbia is a huge, cosmopolitan, especially warm area genus of
ca. 2,000 species—the second largest genus of flowering plants; we are treating the segregate,
Chamaesyce, with 300+ species, as a distinct genus. Euphorbias are basically monoecious or
dioecious herbs, succulents, shrubs, or trees with milky latex. Many are important ornamentals
including E. pulcherrima Willd. ex Klotzsch (POINSETTIA, named for Joel Poinsett, the first U.S.
minister to Mexico, who imported the plant into the U.S. in 1829—Spoerke & Smolinske 1990);
the inflorescences are sometimes surrounded by colorful bracts (these often large and photo-
synthetic and possibly better referred to as leaves). Some Old World species superficially re-
semble Cactaceae and function there as ecological equivalents of that family. 9 As in
Chamaesyce, the latex of all species is apparently toxic and can cause dermatitis or other reac-
tions in sensitive individuals; inflammation and large blisters can develop; the eyes are particu-
larly sensitive. While livestock are sometimes accidentally poisoned, animals generally will
not eat the plants; the toxins are complex terpenes such as euphorbol; some are suspected of
acting as co-carcinogens (= promote the action of “sub”-carcinogenic doses of known carcino-
gens); ingestion of euphorbias can produce severe gastric distress; e.g., POINSETTIA has caused
death in children (Wheeler 1941; Muenscher 1951; Kingsbury 1964, 1965; Kinghorn 1979; Lampe
& McCann 1985; Lampe 1986). Euphorbia antisyphilitica Zucc., CANDELILLA, of the Trans-
Pecos, is the source of Candelilla wax, one of the the highest quality waxes known. The wax is
obtained by boiling the stems in water and dilute acid and then scooping off the floating wax.
Unfortunately, in some areas populations of this species have been greatly reduced (Powell
1988). (Named for Euphorbus, 1st century AD physician to King Juba of Mauritania, who used
latex from some species for medicinal purposes)
                                                                              EUPHORBIA /EUPHORBIACEAE        605

There is no general agreement on whether Euphorbia should be recognized as one large genus
or divided into a number of segregates. Subgenus Chamaesyce is now frequently treated as a
separate genus—as done here following Kartesz (1994), Webster (1994b), G. Webster (pers.
comm. 1997), and M. Mayfield (pers. comm.). Four nc TX species, E. longicruris, E. roemeriana, E.
spathulata, and E. tetrapora, are sometimes treated in the genus Tithymalus. They have flat or
convex involucral glands and bracts forming a whorl beneath the umbelliform, 3–5 rayed, sym-
metrical inflorescence (= pleiochasium). Euphorbia cyathophora, E. davidii, and E. dentata are
segregated by some authors into the genus Poinsettia, and are characterized by usually having
a solitary involucral gland without appendges. The four nc TX species with usually petal-like
gland-appendages, E. bicolor, E. corollata, E. hexagona, and E. marginata, are in subgenus
Agaloma, which could likewise be recognized at the generic level.
REFERENCES: Norton 1900; Wheeler 1936, 1941; Krochmal 1952; Richardson 1968; Johnston 1975;
Subils 1984; Park 1998.

1. Leaves sessile or with narrowed, winged, petiolar base (leaves sometimes absent from flowering
   plants).
   2. Involucres with yellow-green to brownish glands but without conspicuous gland-append-
      ages; stem leaves widest near apex.
      3. Leaves entire; fruits not warty; involucral glands with 2 pointed, horn-like appendages.
         4. Uppermost leafy floral bracts partially fused, sometimes to nearly half their length (thus
            appearing perfoliate) _____________________________________________________ E. roemeriana
         4. Uppermost leafy floral bracts essentially free to their base.
            5. Uppermost leafy floral bracts bluntly triangular, nearly as long as wide or longer; inflo-
               rescences usually appearing relatively open; seeds with relatively few pits in rows to
               nearly smooth; plants at maturity usually green in color; growing in sandy soil _______ E. tetrapora
            5. Uppermost leafy floral bracts suborbicular or reniform, wider than long; inflorescences
               usually appearing very crowded; seeds with numerous small pits ± evenly distributed
               over the seed surface; plants at maturity tannish or coppery in color; growing in lime-
               stone areas ____________________________________________________________ E. longicruris
      3. Leaves finely toothed, at least around apex; fruits warty; involucral glands rounded, entire
          _________________________________________________________________________ E. spathulata
   2. Involucres with white gland-appendages, these usually conspicuous and petal-like (but very
      small and whitish to greenish white in E. hexagona); stem leaves mostly widest near middle or
      of uniform width.
      6. Stem leaves opposite, 1–6 mm wide; bracts never white-margined; gland-appendages small,
         0.5 mm or less long (in radial dimension—see genus description) _____________________ E. hexagona
      6. Stem leaves alternate (can be opposite or whorled just below inflorescence), usually > 6
         mm wide; bracts white-margined OR not so; gland-appendages conspicuous, petal-like, 1.5–
         4 mm long.
         7. Floral bracts and upper leaves not white-margined (leaves sometimes absent from flow-
            ering plants); middle and upper stem leaves usually 12 mm wide or less; capsules
            glabrous __________________________________________________________________ E. corollata
         7. Floral bracts and upper leaves prominently white-margined; middle and upper stem leaves
            usually > 12 mm wide; capsules pubescent.
            8. Uppermost (just below inflorescence), white-margined, leaf-like bracts linear, usually
               5–10 times as long as broad; main stem leaves lanceolate to narrowly elliptic, usually
               3–5 times as long as wide, pubescent __________________________________________ E. bicolor
            8. Uppermost, white-margined, leaf-like bracts narrowly lanceolate to ovate, < 4 times as
               long as broad; main stem leaves elliptic, oblong, or ovate, usually < 2.5 times as long as
               wide, often glabrous _____________________________________________________ E. marginata
606   EUPHORBIACEAE/EUPHORBIA

1. Leaves with distinct petioles 1–25 mm long.
   9. Involucral glands usually solitary, lacking appendages; larger leaf blades usually toothed or
      lobed; upper stem leaves with linear to narrowly lanceolate, elliptic, or broadly ovate blades
      usually (2–)4–45 mm wide; petioles 2–25 mm long.
      10. Main stem leaves all or mostly alternate, essentially glabrous above; upper leaves some-
           times fiddle-shaped ______________________________________________________ E. cyathophora
      10. Main stem leaves all or mostly opposite, pubescent above; upper leaves not fiddle-shaped.
           11. Leaf blades usually widest at the middle, linear-elliptic to broadly elliptic; petioles of-
               ten nearly as long as the blades at midstem; trichomes of the lower leaf surfaces stiff,
               strongly tapered with a broad basal cell; seeds angular in cross-section, unevenly tu-
               berculate, 2.0–2.7 mm long __________________________________________________ E. davidii
           11. Leaf blades usually widest below the middle, lanceolate to trullate (= trowel-shaped);
               petioles not usually more than a third as long as the blade at midstem; trichomes of
               the lower leaf surfaces weak, filiform, lacking a broad basal cell; seeds rounded in cross-
               section, evenly tuberculate, 1.7–2.0(–2.2) mm long _______________________________ E. dentata
   9. Involucral glands 4 or 5, with conspicuous or inconspicuous, white or pinkish gland-append-
      ages; larger leaf blades entire; upper stem leaves with linear to lanceolate or narrowly oblong
      blades 1–6 mm wide; petioles 1–3.5 mm long
      12. Involucres with 4 glands; gland-appendages often conspicuous, white or pinkish, 0.5–2.5
          mm long (in radial dimension—see genus description); capsules 2–2.5 mm long; stipules
          1–1.5 mm long; stems several from at or near base (this Chamaesyce species often has the
          leaf blades symmetrical basally and is thus included in the Euphorbia key to prevent
          confusion) ____________________________________________________ see Chamaesyce missurica
      12. Involucres with 5 glands; gland-appendages very small and inconspicuous, 0.5 mm or less
          long, whitish or greenish white; capsules 3–5 mm long; stipules absent or represented by
          minute glands; stem 1 from base _______________________________________________ E. hexagona

Euphorbia bicolor Engelm. & A. Gray, (two-colored), SNOW-ON-THE-PRAIRIE. Erect, softly pilose
annual to 130 cm tall; middle stem leaves 3–5 times as long as wide; involucral glands usually 5;
gland-appendages petal-like, 2–3 mm long. Prairies, roadsides, and waste ground; mainly
Grand Prairie and Blackland Prairie e to e TX, also Montague Co., in nc TX sw to Johnson Co.
While generally quite distinct, in the vicinity of Johnson Co. (and probably other areas as well)
where the ranges of E. bicolor and E. marginata overlap, intermediate individuals can be found.
Jul–Oct. The fruits are ballistic (= seeds thrown catapult-like from the fruits). The milky sap is
caustic and can cause a skin rash (M. Mayfield, pers. comm.). 9

Euphorbia corollata L., (corolla-like), FLOWERING SPURGE, TRAMP’S SPURGE. Perennial with soli-
tary or few stems to 90 cm tall; leaves alternate, linear to elliptic-oblong; involucral glands 5,
cupped; gland-appendages petal-like, 1.5–4 mm long. Clay soils; Collin, Cooke, Dallas, Fannin,
Grayson, Lamar, and Montague cos.; e TX w to n part of nc TX, May–Sep. The rootstock report-
edly contains a poisonous substance, euphorbon (Burlage 1968). 9

Euphorbia cyathophora Murray, (cup-bearing), WILD POINSETTIA, FIRE-ON -THE-MOUNTAIN,
PAINTED EUPHORBIA, PAINTED SPURGE, PAINTEDLEAF. Nearly glabrous annual to 75 cm tall; leaf
blades extremely variable in shape, elliptic to oblong-ovate or ovate, varying to linear-lan-
ceolate or even linear, sometimes lobed and appearing fiddle-shaped, usually finely toothed to
entire, the uppermost leaves and the floral bracts usually rosy or rosy and whitish at base; in-
volucral glands usually solitary, cupped, without appendages. Stream banks, open areas; Bell,
Dallas, Grayson, Hunt, and Kaufman cos., also Denton (Mahler 1988) and Tarrant (F. Norris,
pers. comm.) cos.; widely scattered nearly throughout TX. May–Sep.

Euphorbia davidii Subils, (for David L. Anderson of Villa Mercedes, Argentina, who in 1984 col-
                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS           607




    Euphorbia bicolor [BT3]




                                                Euphorbia cyathophora [HEA]




    Euphorbia corollata [GLE]




Euphorbia davidii [KUR]         Euphorbia dentata [MAG]                       Euphorbia hexagona [BT3]
608   EUPHORBIACEAE/EUPHORBIA

lected one of the paratypes). Similar to E. dentata but more robust, with hairs on the upper
stems and young growth coarse, slightly recurved, and stiff (not to the touch so much as to the
eye); involucral glands usually solitary, cupped, without appendages; capsules somewhat ovoid
or broader at the base, tapering to the apex; seeds angular-ovoid with unevenly and roughly
sculptured surface, with a suggestion of 2 transverse ridges in well-formed seeds on the dorsal
surface, 2.2–2.7 mm long, with caruncle 1.0–1.4 mm wide; n = 28 (tetraploid). Disturbed sites;
Eastland Co. (TEX—M. Mayfield, pers. comm.). Specimens of this species have long been
misidentified as the rather similar and more common E. dentata. Consequently, its range
within TX is unclear but it is probably more common in w TX; according to M. Mayfield (pers.
comm.), it is to be expected as a weed in other parts of nc TX area. This description and the di-
chotomy in the key separating E. davidii and E. dentata are from M. Mayfield (pers. comm.).

Euphorbia dentata Michx., (toothed), TOOTHED SPURGE. Rather sparsely pubescent annual to 75
cm tall, with long weak hairs on the young growth and abaxial leaf surfaces; leaf blades nar-
rowly oblong-lanceolate to rhombic-ovate, rather coarsely and shallowly toothed; involucral
glands usually solitary, cupped, without appendages; capsules smoothly rounded, depressed
spherical; seeds very rounded to roundly ovoid, the dorsal surface evenly tuberculate with low
sculpturing, 1.7–2.0(–2.2) mm long with caruncle ca. 0.8 mm or less wide; n = 14 (diploid).
Stream bottoms, fields, roadsides and disturbed sites; throughout TX. May–Oct, commonly two
generations in one year.

Euphorbia hexagona Nutt. ex Spreng., (hexagonal, six-angled), GREEN SPURGE, SIX-ANGLE EU-
PHORBIA. Minutely and sparsely pubescent annual, normally erect, to 80 cm tall; leaves oppo-
site, entire; involucral glands 5, with small, inconspicuous gland-appendages. Loose sandy open
areas, stream banks or bottoms; Grayson, Somervell, and Tarrant cos.; nc TX and Plains Coun-
try. Jun–Oct.

Euphorbia longicruris Scheele, (long-legged), WEDGE-LEAF EUPHORBIA. Plant to 25 cm tall; leaves
obovate with long-tapering base; branches or their internodes mostly remaining short, usually
not exceeding the very wide floral bracts until late fruiting stage (the floral bracts are upright
or ascending and enclose the involucres); involucral glands 4, cresent-shaped, with an erect
horn at each end, without appendages. Limestone outcrops; Bell, Brown, Coryell, Tarrant, Wise,
and Young cos., also collected in 1880 in Navarro Co.; Edwards Plateau and e Plains Country n
and e to nc TX. Late Mar–early Jun.

Euphorbia marginata Pursh, (margined), SNOW-ON-THE-MOUNTAIN. Pilose to glabrous annual to
ca. 200 cm tall; involucral glands usually 5, cupped; gland-appendages petal-like, 2–4 mm long.
Calcareous uplands, stream bottoms, and low areas; w TX e to a line from Bell to Cooke cos.,
cultivated further e. Jul–Oct. Reported to produce evil-tasting poisonous honey and to be toxic to
livestock; the sap causes skin eruptions and has been used to brand cattle in preference to a hot
iron (Kingsbury 1964, 1965; Burlage 1968); care should thus be taken to avoid the sap. 9 m/90

Euphorbia roemeriana Scheele, (for Ferdinand Roemer, 1818–1891, geologist, paleontologist, and
explorer of TX), ROEMER’S SPURGE, ROEMER’S EUPHORBIA. Annual to 30 cm tall; leafy bracts of the
floral branches paired, opposite, semi-circular, partially fused—sometimes to nearly half their
length; involucral glands with an erect horn at each end, without appendages. Calcareous soils;
Bosque and Montague cos. (Mahler 1988), also Williamson Co. (M. Mayfield, pers. comm.); rare
in nc TX, mainly Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Spring. Mark Mayfield (pers. comm.) indi-
cated that this species occurs mainly to the s of nc TX and that the Montague Co. citation is
probably erroneous. E

Euphorbia spathulata Lam., (spoon-shaped), WARTY EUPHORBIA. Glabrous annual to 55 cm tall;
leaves numerous, oblanceolate, obtuse; leafy floral bracts mostly broader than long; involucral
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS    609




Euphorbia longicruris [ARM]                     Euphorbia roemeriana [ARM]




                                                                                             Euphorbia marginata [BT3]




                        Euphorbia spathulata [BB1, STE]




 Euphorbia tetrapora [ARM]                     Leptopus phyllanthoides [BB2]                Phyllanthus abnormis [BT3]
610   EUPHORBIACEAE/LEPTOPUS

glands 4, minute, without horns or appendages; style branches about as long as the un-
branched portion. Prairies, disturbed areas; nearly throughout TX. Late Mar–May.

Euphorbia tetrapora Engelm., (four-pored), WEAK EUPHORBIA. Slender, to 20 cm tall; leaves nar-
rowly oblanceolate; branches of the inflorescence or their internodes longer than the floral
bracts; involucral glands 4, with an erect horn at each end, without appendages. Sandy woods
and fields; e TX w to West Cross Timbers. Late Mar–May.

                                            LEPTOPUS
AA genus of ca. 10 species widely scattered in the Old World and North America (Webster
1994b); previously submerged in Andrachne (e.g., Correll & Johnston 1970; Kartesz 1994; Jones
et al. 1997). Webster (1994b) indicated that Leptopus differs from Andrachne (sensu stricto) in
having anatropous ovules and that it represents a connecting link between Andrachne and the
small tropical American genus Astrocasia. He assigned it to a separate subtribe in the tribe
Phyllantheae. (Greek: lepto, fine or slender, and pus, foot, presumably meaning with slender or
thin stalks)
REFERENCE: Webster 1994b.

Leptopus phyllanthoides (Nutt.) G.L. Webster, (resembling Phyllanthus—leaf flower),
MAIDENBUSH. Woody-based perennial or small shrub to 1 m tall; sap not milky; leaves numer-
ous, alternate, subsessile; leaf blades entire, sparsely pilose or glabrous; stipules oblong-lan-
ceolate; staminate and pistillate flowers usually on separate plants; perianth with both sepals
and petals; capsules 4–5 mm long, 7–7.5 mm across, with 2 seeds in each of the 3 cells. Ravines
or stream banks on limestone; collected by Reverchon in Johnson Co., also McLennan Co.
(Mahler 1988); nc TX s to Edwards Plateau. May–Jun. [Andrachne phyllanthoides (Nutt.) J.M.
Coult., Savia phyllanthoides var. reverchonii (J.M. Coult.) Pax & K. Hoffm.] We are following
Webster (1994b) in treating this species in Leptopus.

                              PHYLLANTHUS LEAF-FLOWER
Ours low, glabrous annuals or perennials; sap not milky; leaves many, rather crowded, alternate,
short-petioled or subsessile, entire; stipules narrowly triangular-lanceolate; flowers unisexual,
both sexes usually on the same plant; petals absent; fruit a usually ballistically dehiscent cap-
sule; seeds usually 2 in each of the 3 locules.
AA genus of ca. 600 species of herbs, shrubs, and trees of tropical and warm areas; some are
used ornamentally, others medicinally. (Greek: phyllon, leaf, and anthos, flower, because the
flowers in a few species are borne upon leaf-like dilated branches)
REFERENCES: Webster 1956, 1970.

1. Leaves spirally arranged; plants perennial with base of plant and root becoming thickened and
   woody _____________________________________________________________________ P. polygonoides
1. Leaves distichous (= in 2 ranks); plants annual.
   2. Pedicels of female flowers (3–)4–7 mm long; stamens 5; introduced weed known in nc TX only
      from Tarrant Co. _________________________________________________________________ P. tenellus
   2. Pedicels of female flowers < 0.5–3(–3.5) mm long; stamens 2–3; native, including species wide-
      spread in nc TX.
      3. Main stems with leaves and flowers; stamens 3; filaments free; seeds verruculose (= with
         extremely minute warts—use dissecting scope) ________________________________ P. caroliniensis
      3. Main stems with leaves reduced to scales, the leaves and flowers only on specialized de-
         ciduous side branches; stamens 2 or 3; filaments entirely connate; seeds not verruculose.
         4. Leaves not minutely rough-scabrid beneath to the touch; female flowers with pedicels
            1–3(–3.5) mm long, distal on the branches, the male flowers proximal; stamens usually 2
                                                                        REVERCHONIA/EUPHORBIACEAE        611

         (3 in largest flowers); seeds striatulate (= with very fine lines), not transversely ribbed;
         pistillate calyx lobes ovate to obovate; native species widespread in TX _______________ P. abnormis
      4. Leaves minutely rough-scabrid beneath to the touch; female flowers and capsules
         subsessile (pedicels 0.5 mm or less long), proximal on the branches, the male flowers
         distal; stamens 3; seeds conspicuously transversely ribbed (use lens); pistillate calyx lobes
         linear-oblong to lanceolate; introduced species known in nc TX only from Tarrant Co.,
         mainly se and e TX ___________________________________________________________ P. urinaria

Phyllanthus abnormis Baill., (abnormal), DRUMMOND’S LEAF-FLOWER. Annual but basal stem and
root can sometimes be thickened and appear perennial; leaf blades not oblique at base; stems
10–50 cm tall; leaves 3–10 mm long, 1–4 mm wide; pedicels of female flowers 1–3(–3.5) mm long;
fruiting calyx lobes scarcely over 1 mm long; stamens 2 in most flowers; filaments entirely connate;
style branches not capitate; capsules 2.3–2.7 mm wide. Loose sandy soils; widespread in TX, in
nc TX mainly East Cross Timbers w, once found in railroad gravel at Dallas. May–Oct. Reported
to be poisonous to livestock; symptoms include listlessness, ceaseless walking, diarrhea, ex-
haustion, kidney degeneration, liver cirrhosis, and death (Kingsbury 1964; Burlage 1968). 9

Phyllanthus caroliniensis Walter, (of Carolina), CAROLINA LEAF-FLOWER. Plant 10–40 cm tall;
leaves 5–20(–30) mm long, 4–10(–16) mm wide; pedicels of female flowers 0.5–1(–1.5) mm long;
pistillate calyx lobes linear-lanceolate or narrowly spatulate; capsules 1.5–2 mm wide. Weedy
areas; Henderson Co., also Bosque, Erath, Hamilton (Stanford 1976), Lamar (Carr 1994), and Tar-
rant (Webster 1970) cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Nov.

Phyllanthus polygonoides Nutt. ex Spreng., (resembling Polygonum—knotweed), KNOTWEED
LEAF-FLOWER. Plant ca. 10–50 cm tall; leaves on the main stems and branches, usually 5–10 mm
long, 1.5–5 mm wide; usually monoecious but sometimes dioecious; stamens 3, the filaments
united about half way into a column; pedicels of female flowers 2.5–7 mm long; capsules 2.7–3.2
mm wide. Limestone outcrops, rarely in sandy clay; nearly throughout TX. Apr–Jul, Sep–Oct.

Phyllanthus tenellus Roxb., (tender, delicate). Plant 20–50 cm tall; main stems with leaves re-
duced to scales, the leaves and flowers on specialized deciduous side branches; leaves 6–25 mm
long, 4–11 mm wide; filaments free; capsules 1.7–1.9 mm wide. Yard in Fort Worth (Tarrant Co.);
otherwise known in TX only in se part of the state; a 20th century introduction to the se U.S.
(Webster 1970). Throughout growing season. Native to the Mascarene Islands (Indian Ocean). I

Phyllanthus urinaria L., (presumably in reference to urine), PEEWATER LEAF-FLOWER. Plant 15–50
cm tall; leaves 6–25 mm long, 2–9 mm wide; monoecious; capsules ca. 2–2.2 mm wide. Yard
weed; Tarrant Co.; mainly se and e TX. Flowering throughout the growing season. Native of
tropical e Asia. Not detected in the continental U.S. until 1944 (Webster 1970). Reported to con-
tain alkaloids and to be used as a fish poison (Burlage 1968). 9 I

An additional species, P. niruri (Kunth) G.L. Webster, (derivation unknown), is reported by Hatch
et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) but apparently occurs only to the s of nc TX (Webster
1970). It differs from P. abnormis in having the leaf blades oblique at base, filaments connate
halfway or less, style branches capitate, and fruiting calyx lobes larger (3–3.5 mm long).

                                          REVERCHONIA
AA monotypic genus of sandy areas of the sw U.S. and adjacent Mexico. It is closely related to
Phyllanthus (Webster 1994b). (This unusual genus was named in honor of Julien Reverchon,
1837–1905, a French-American immigrant to Dallas and important botanical collector of early
TX. Many of his specimens are in the herbaria at BRIT and the Missouri Botanical Garden)
REFERENCE: Webster & Miller 1963.
612   EUPHORBIACEAE/RICINUS

Reverchonia arenaria A. Gray, (of sand or sandy places), SAND REVERCHONIA. Annual monoe-
cious herb to 0.5 m tall, glabrous; sap not milky; main stem glaucous-white; lateral branches
prominent; leaf blades elliptic to narrowly oblong-elliptic or nearly linear (15–)20–40(–45) mm
long, 1.8–9 mm wide, apiculate at apex; petioles 1–3 mm long; inflorescences small cymules in
the axils of leaves of lateral branches (not occurring on main stem), the cymules usually with a
single female flower and 4–6 male flowers; flowers conspicuous; male flowers: calyx lobes 4,
purplish to pinkish with a central green strip, 1.5–2.5 mm long; disk with an I-beam-like out-
line; stamens 2; female flowers: pedicel 1.5–2 mm long in fruit, elongating up to 8.7 mm in fruit;
calyx lobes 6(–5), purplish to pinkish with a central green strip, to 2.9 mm long; disk flat and
roundish or 6-angled in outline; capsules ± spheroidal and flattened at the ends, conspicuous,
7–9.8 mm in diam.; seeds 4.4–6.6 mm long. Deep sand; Webster and Miller (1963) cited a Tarrant
Co. collection (Fort Worth, Mar. 1890, Bodin (US)) as “very dubious”; Trans-Pecos and Plains
Country e to Wichita Co. just to the w of the nw part of nc TX; included because of the Tarrant
Co. specimen and because of the possibility of occurrence in sandy areas along the Red River in
the nw part of nc TX. Summer–fall. Reported to be toxic to livestock (Kingsbury 1964) and in
experimental animals to cause acute liver and kidney damage (Burlage 1968). 9

                                   RICINUS CASTOR-BEAN
A A monotypic genus native from e and ne Africa to the Middle East, now naturalized
throughout the tropics. (Latin: ricinus, tick, because of the resemblance of seed to a tick)

Ricinus communis L., (common, general), CASTOR-BEAN, CASTOR-OIL-PLANT, PALMA CHRISTI,
HIGUERILLA. Large, coarse, herbaceous, monoecious annual (in nc TX) 1–5 m tall; sap watery;
leaves alternate, with long petioles to 30 cm long; leaf blades peltate, with (5–)7–9(–11) palmate
lobes, these serrate with the teeth gland-tipped; inflorescences terminal, raceme- or panicle-
like, the staminate flowers usually near the base, the pistillate flowers near apex; sepals usually
5; petals 0; stamens numerous; styles 3, plumose, red; capsules round, 12–20 mm in diam., usu-
ally covered with soft, dark spines; seeds 8–11 mm long, glabrous, with mottled surface. Culti-
vated for its foliage and rarely escapes; roadfill, waste areas; Henderson Co. near e edge of nc TX,
also Palo Pinto Co. (Reverchon) and Tarrant Co. along Trinity River (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.);
mainly s TX. Flowering throughout the growing season. Native to Africa and Middle East. CAS-
TOR-BEAN has a very long history of cultivation; it has been found in 6000 year-old Egyptian
tombs (Zohary 1982). All parts of the plant, but especially the seeds, contain many alkaloids
and toxic principles including a lectin (type of phytotoxin or toxic protein), ricin, one of the
most toxic compounds known. If eaten, 1–8 seeds are fatally poisonous; they are also the source
of castor oil, used medicinally in the past; the toxins are not oil soluble. Castor oil is also used as
an industrial lubricant. Livestock can be poisoned from eating the leaves or seeds (Muenscher
1951; Kingsbury 1964; Hardin & Arena 1974; Stephens 1980; Mabberley 1987). 9 I

                                             SAPIUM
A A genus of ca. 90–100 species (Webster 1994b) native to tropical and warm areas to
Patagonia; the majority are neotropical. According to Webster (1994b), “Triadica , accepted by
some Asian workers, is distinctively different from the neotropical species in such features as its
non-arillate seeds; further investigation may show that it should be generically separate from
Sapium.” If Triadica is recognized, our single introduced species will have to be treated in that
segregate genus. (Latin name used by Pliny for a resinous pine or fir, alluding to the greasy latex
of these plants)
Sapium sebiferum (L.) Roxb., (tallow-bearing), CHINESE TALLOW TREE, VEGETABLE TALLOW TREE.
Rapidly growing monoecious tree usually 3–10 m tall, unarmed, essentially glabrous, with
milky sap; branches often slender and drooping; leaves alternate, the blades rhombic-ovate, 3–
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS        613




Phyllanthus caroliniensis [BB2]


                                                                                     Phyllanthus tenellus [HO5]




                                  Phyllanthus polygonoides [SHI]




                                                                                        ?




                                                                                             /
   Phyllanthus urinaria [LAM]


                                                                                 Reverchonia arenaria [HEA, RHO]



                                   Ricinus communis [BL1, LAM]
614   EUPHORBIACEAE/STILLINGIA

7(–10) cm long, entire; petioles usually longer than blades, with 2 glands at juncture of blade
and petiole; flowers in terminal spike-like inflorescences (3–)5–15 cm long; petals absent; stami-
nate flowers in clusters at the upper nodes; pistillate flowers solitary at the nodes; fruit a 3-
lobed capsule ca. 1–4 cm long and about as broad; seeds 7–8 mm long, long persistent on the
placenta after the capsule walls have fallen, chalky-white. Widely cultivated as ornamental
shade tree, rarely escapes in nc TX; Dallas-Fort Worth area is near limit of cold hardiness as
cold damage is often observed; Grayson Co. (edge of Waterloo lake on sandy soil), also Dallas
(H.S. Moss Park, Whiter Rock Lake) and Tarrant cos.; more commonly escapes in se TX where it
can be a problematic invader of native prairies. Aug–Nov. Native of China and Japan. [Triadica
sebifera (L.) Small] This species was introduced into the U.S. in South Carolina in the late 1770s
and is now widespread; it displaces native vegetation and is considered one of the most serious
invasive exotics in the U.S.; it apparently releases compounds that modify soil chemistry and
affect the establishment of native species (Flack & Furlow 1996; Jubinsky & Anderson 1996).
The fatty covering of the seed is used for candlewax and soap (Mabberley 1987). Burlage (1968)
reported the milky sap as poisonous. 9 I

                   STILLINGIA QUEEN’S-DELIGHT, QUEEN’S-ROOT
Glabrous unarmed perennial herbs usually with several to many stems from a woody root; sap
milky; leaves numerous, crowded, alternate, subsessile, evenly and finely glandular-toothed;
flowers in terminal, sessile, spike-like inflorescences (which become over-topped by whorls of
leafy branches developed from beneath them), unisexual with both sexes in the same inflores-
cence, borne in the axils of minute triangular-ovate bracts, the bracts with fleshy, saucer- or
cup-shaped, gland-like stipules at each side, the glands larger than the bracts; staminate flow-
ers above, on a fleshy axis which falls after flowering; pistillate flowers few, at base; gynobase (=
lower portion of ovary) becoming thick and hard, persistent after the seeds fall, triangular; fruit
a shallowly 3-lobed, 3-seeded capsule; seeds with a prominent caruncle (outgrowth).
AA genus of ca. 30 species of tropical and warm America, Madagascar, e Malesia, and Fiji. 9
Feeding experiments with S. treculeana (Müll. Arg.) I.M. Johnst., of s TX and the Edwards Pla-
teau, indicated that the plant may be highly toxic due to hydrocyanic acid; small amounts of
leaves and stems were lethal to sheep. (Named for Dr. Benjamin Stillingfleet, 1702–1771, English
naturalist)

1. Stem leaves lanceolate or elliptic, 9–30 mm wide; capsules ca. 12 mm long and broad; plants of
   sandy soil _______________________________________________________________________ S. sylvatica
1. Stem leaves linear, 2–5 mm wide; capsules ca. 6 mm long and broad; plants of limestone habitats
    ________________________________________________________________________________ S. texana

Stillingia sylvatica Garden ex L., (forest-loving), QUEEN’S-DELIGHT. Stems ascending to erect, to
ca. 1 m tall; gynobase lobes 6 mm long; seeds ca. 8 mm long (not counting caruncle). Sandy
prairies, open woods, or open ground; Grayson, Lamar, Montague, Parker, and Tarrant cos.;
nearly throughout TX. May–Jun. Used medicinally, but overdoses cause toxic symptons; the la-
tex is reported to have vesicant (= blister-causing) properties (Duke 1985; Lampe 1986). 9

Stillingia texana I.M. Johnst., (of Texas), TEXAS STILLINGIA. Stems decumbent to erect, to 65 cm
long; gynobase lobes 3–3.5 mm long; seeds ca. 5 mm long (not counting caruncle). Gravelly or
rocky, calcareous soils; nc TX and the Edwards Plateau. Mid-May–Jun. The latex is reported to
have vesicant (= blister-causing) properties (Lampe 1986). 9

                                     TRAGIA NOSEBURN
Perennial herbs, erect to trailing or twining, usually with stinging hairs; sap not milky; leaves
alternate; leaf blades toothed; stipules foliaceous, lanceolate to ovate; flowers in peduncled, axil-
                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS               615




  Sapium sebiferum [EN1]                                Stillingia sylvatica [BB1,BT3, GLE]




                           Tragia betonicifolia [RHO]                           Tragia brevispica [RHO]




Stillingia texana [BT3]




                           Tragia ramosa [SHI]                              Tragia urticifolia [BT3]
616   EUPHORBIACEAE/TRAGIA

lary (at least appearing so), spike-like, minutely bracted racemes, apetalous, unisexual, most
often both sexes in the same inflorescence; staminate flowers above, minute; pistillate below,
solitary or few, larger; staminate flowers with 3–4(–6) sepals; stamens usually equaling the
number of calyx lobes; pistillate flowers usually with 5–6 narrow sepals; styles 3; fruit an ex-
plosively dehiscent capsule.
AA genus of 100 species of tropical and warm areas of the world; usually with stiff, nettle-like
stinging hairs. 9All nc TX species have the stinging hairs which can be quite painful if al-
lowed to come into contact with skin. According to Lampe (1986), only four families
(Euphorbiaceae, Hydrophyllaceae, Loasaceae, and Urticaceae) have stinging hairs—nc TX has
stinging representatives of all of these except the Hydrophyllaceae. (Name from Tragus, Latin
name for early herbalist, Hieronymous Bock, 1498–1554)
REFERENCE: Miller & Webster 1967.
1. Persistent base of the staminate pedicel usually nearly as long as or longer than its subtending
   bract; stigmatic surfaces papillate; styles connate 1/3–1/2, with a slight constriction where
   they join the ovary _______________________________________________________________ T. urticifolia
1. Persistent base of the staminate pedicel conspicuously shorter than its subtending bract; stig-
   matic surfaces smooth to papillate; styles free or connate, without a constriction where they join
   the ovary.
   2. Calyx lobes (pistillate) as long or longer than pistil at anthesis; staminate flowers 14–75 per
      raceme, compactly arranged on axis ____________________________________________ T. betonicifolia
   2. Calyx lobes (pistillate) shorter than pistil at anthesis; staminate flowers 2–20 per raceme, not
      compactly arranged.
      3. Larger leaf blades usually broadly triangular, usually 1–2.5 times as long as wide; stigmatic
         surfaces papillate; styles connate basally to 1/3 their length _________________________ T. brevispica
      3. Larger leaf blades usually linear-lanceolate to ovate, usually 2–4 times as long as broad;
         stigmatic surfaces not papillate; styles connate 1/3–1/2 or more their length _______________ T. ramosa

Tragia betonicifolia Nutt., (with leaves like Betonica—betony, now = Stachys in Lamiaceae),
BETONY NOSEBURN. Stems to 50 cm tall, erect, decumbent, or trailing; leaves ovate to triangular-
lanceolate, usually cordate to truncate at base; pistillate calyx lobes 6, 1.8–3 mm long at anthe-
sis, 3–5 mm long in fruit; styles connate basally; stigmatic surfaces papillate. Sandy soils; se TX
and Post Oak Savannah w to Rolling Plains, also Edwards Plateau. May–Jun, Sep–Oct. [T.
urticifolia Michx. var. texana Shinners] Stinging hairs present. 9
Tragia brevispica Engelm. & A. Gray, (short-spiked), SHORT-SPIKE NOSEBURN. Stems to 100 cm
long or longer, erect to trailing and twining; pistillate calyx lobes 6, 1.3–2 mm long at anthesis,
1.8–3.5 long in fruit. Calcareous soils, open woods and prairies; nc TX s and w to s TX and
Edwards Plateau. Apr–Oct. Stinging hairs present. 9
Tragia ramosa Torr., (branched), CATNIP NOSEBURN. Stems to 50 cm tall, erect, decumbent, trail-
ing, with tendency toward twining; leaf blades usually truncate basally; pistillate calyx lobes
5–7, 0.8–2.5 mm long at anthesis, 1.5–3 mm long in fruit. Disturbed areas; Post Oak Savannah s
and w through nc TX to w TX. Apr–Oct. [T. nepetifolia Cav. var. leptophylla (Torr.) Shinners]
Stinging hairs present. 9
Tragia urticifolia Michx., (with leaves like Urtica —nettle), NETTLE-LEAF NOSEBURN. Stems to 65
mm tall, erect to decumbent; pistillate calyx lobes (5–)6, 1.3–2.2 mm long at anthesis, 2–3 mm
long in fruit. Sandy soils, fields, and open woods; Henderson Co. near extreme e margin of nc
TX; mainly se and e TX. Spring–fall. Jones et al. (1997) treated TX material as T. urticifolia var.
texana Shinners. We are following Kartesz (1994) who recognized T. urticifolia but put the var.
texana into synonymy under T. betonicifolia. According to M. Mayfield (pers. comm.), this spe-
cies occurs only in sandy habitats to the e of nc TX. Stinging hairs present. 9
                                                                                                FABACEAE     617

Tragia amblyodonta (Müll.Arg.) Pax & K. Hoffm., (blunt-toothed), DOG-TOOTH NOSEBURN, was
cited for vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), but according to M. Mayfield (pers.
comm.) it occurs in s and w TX and does not come close to nc TX. In the above key it would
come out closest to T. brevispica. The two can be distinguished as follows:

1. Mature leaves usually densely pubescent with stinging hairs; plants grayish green in appear-
   ance; leaf blades usually truncate to sagittate (rarely cordate) basally; staminate flowers 3–60 per
   raceme ______________________________________________________________________ T. amblyodonta
1. Mature leaves usually only sparsely pubescent with stinging hairs; plants green in appear-
   ance; leaf blades truncate to cordate basally; staminate flowers 3–6(–10) per raceme ___________ T. brevispica


            FABACEAE (LEGUMINOSAE) LEGUME, BEAN,
                                        OR PULSE FAMILY
Plants herbaceous or woody; leaves basal or alternate (sometimes crowded and appearing
subopposite or whorled), compound or apparently simple (with only 1 leaflet); leaflets entire,
or in a few genera toothed or lobed; stipules present (except Lotus and Crotalaria ), falling early
in many species; flowers solitary or in racemes, panicles, spikes, heads, or umbel-like clusters;
sepals 5, separate or united; petals 1–5, equal or in most genera unequal; stamens 5 to many; pis-
til 1; fruit a legume, developed from a 1-celled superior ovary with 1–many ovules and parietal
placentation, in general opening along both sutures.
AA huge (16,400 species in 657 genera), cosmopolitan, vegetatively variable family ranging
from herbs to rain forest canopy trees; Ballenger et al. (1993) suggested there are ca. 20,000 spe-
cies, while Cronquist (1993) indicated 18,000 species. Nearly a third of all species are in 6 large
genera: Acacia, Astragalus, Cassia, Crotalaria , Indigofera, and Mimosa. The Fabaceae is the
third largest angiosperm family in terms of numbers (after Asteraceae and Orchidaceae), and
in importance to humans is second only to the Poaceae. It is also extremely important ecologi-
cally because of the symbiotic nitrogen-fixing Rhizobium bacteria associated with the roots of
many species. The family includes many important timber trees, ornamentals, and particu-
larly protein-rich food plants including Arachis (PEANUTS), Cicer (CHICK-PEAS), Glycine (SOY-
BEANS), Lens (LENTILS), Phaseolus (BEANS), and Pisum (PEAS); in fact, seeds of legumes are the
world’s most important source of vegetable protein for man and animals (Isely 1990). 9 There
are often toxic, defensive, non-protein amino acids in the seeds or vegetative tissues as well as
alkaloids. For example, the tropical Abrus precatorius L. (PRECATORY-BEAN or ROSARY-PEA) has
striking red and black seeds sometimes used in necklaces; they contain abrin, a protein so toxic
that a single chewed seed is enough to kill a human (Kingsbury 1964). The family, here recog-
nized as having three subfamilies, is sometimes split into three questionably monophyletic
families (e.g., Cronquist 1993). Recent evidence (Ballenger et al. 1993) suggested that the
Caesalpinioideae is a basal paraphyletic assemblage from which the monophyletic
Mimosoideae and Papilionoideae are derived. The tribal arrangement followed here is from
Polhill and Raven (1981). The Fabaceae is the third largest family in the nc TX flora (after
Asteraceae and Poaceae), with 176 species. Family name conserved from Faba, a genus of a
single widely cultivated species, F. vulgaris Moench, BROAD BEAN, of the Mediterranean region;
it is now usually lumped into Vicia as V. faba L. (Latin: faba, bean) (subclass Rosidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: characteristic most helpful in field recognition is the legume
fruit—a 1-chambered, pod-like, often bean-like fruit; other helpful clues include leaves with 3
leaflets and pea-like flowers, pinnately compound leaves with flowers in heads with obviously
exserted stamens, or stamens in a 9 (fused) + 1 (separate) arrangement.
REFERENCES: Rydberg 1919–1920, 1923–1929; Britton & Rose 1928, 1930; Turner 1959; Isely 1973,
