                                                                          ACORUS/ACORACEAE 1077


                   CLASS MONOCOTYLEDONAE
Plants usually herbaceous—in other words, lacking regular secondary thickening (except
Palmaceae, Smilacaceae, most Agavaceae, and a few Poaceae); seedlings usually with 1 seed leaf
or cotyledon; stems or branches elongating by apical growth and also by growth of basal por-
tion of internodes; leaves when present alternate, whorled, basal, or rarely opposite, elongating
by basal growth (readily seen on spring-flowering bulbs whose leaf-tips have been frozen
back); leaf blades usually with parallel or concentrically curved veins, these unbranched or
with inconspicuous, short, transverse connectives (leaves net-veined or with prominent midrib
and spreading side-veins parallel with each other in Alismataceae, Araceae, Smilacaceae,
Marantaceae, and some Orchidaceae); perianth with dissimilar inner and outer whorls (petals
and sepals), or all parts about alike (tepals), the parianth parts separate or united, commonly in
3s, less often in 2s, rarely in 5s, or perianth of scales or bristles, or entirely absent.

AWorldwide, the Monocotyledonae is a group composed of ca. 55,800 species in 2,652 genera
arranged in 84 families (Mabberley 1997); 25 of these families occur in nc TX. The monocots
appear to be a well-supported monophyletic group derived from within the monosulcate
Magnoliidae group of dicots (Chase et al. 1993; Duvall et al. 1993; Qiu et al. 1993). From the cla-
distic standpoint, the dicots are therefore paraphyletic and thus inappropriate for formal recog-
nition (see explantion and Fig. 41 in Apendix 6). Within the monocots, Acorus appears to be the
sister group to all other monocots, with the Alismataceae (and Potamogeton) being the next
most basal group (Duvall et al. 1993).
REFERENCES: Cronquist 1981, 1988, 1993; Dahlgren et al. 1985; Thorne 1992; Chase et al. 1993;
Clark et al. 1993; Duvall et al. 1993; Qiu et al. 1993; Reveal 1993a, 1993b; Takhtajan 1997.


        ACORACEAE SWEETFLAG OR CALAMUS FAMILY
AAcorus has traditionally been placed in the Araceae (e.g., Dahlgren et al. 1985) despite many
characters unusual for an aroid. Grayum (1987) gave extensive reasons why the genus should
be placed in its own family. The Acoraceae, thus circumscribed, is a very small, Old World and
North American family of 2 species (3 if Gymnostachysis included). Using cpDNA restriction
site analysis, a clade containing Acorus and the somewhat similar Gymnostachys(also tradi-
tionally placed in the Araceae) was resolved as a sister group of all other monocots (Davis 1995).
An anaylsis by Duvall et al. (1993) also pointed to Acorus as the most basal living lineage of
monocotyledons and a more recent molecular study by Soltis et al. (1997) again suggested that
Acorus is anomalous among monocots. These results all support the recognition of the
Acoraceae as separate from the Araceae and suggest further study is needed to determine its
phylogenetic position. (subclass Arecidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only member of this family in nc TX is an aromatic herb
with sword-like leaves roughly 1 m long and a cylindrical, finger-like spadix diverging laterally
from an elongate, spathe-like scape.
REFERENCES: Wilson 1960a; Grayum 1987; Duvall et al. 1993; Davis 1995; Soltis et al. 1997.

                            ACORUS SWEETFLAG, CALAMUS
AA genus of 2 species with iris-like or grass-like leaves; sometimes cultivated for fragrant oils
in rhizomes. (Latin name for an aromatic plant or possibly Latin: acorus, without pupil, the
name used by Dioscorides for an iris used in treating cataracts)
REFERENCES: Buell 1935; Harper 1936.

Acorus calamus L., (ancient name for a reed). DRUG SWEETFLAG, SWEETFLAG, CALAMUS . Aro-
matic, rhizomatous (thick) perennial herb with erect, linear, sword-shaped, parallel-veined
1078 AGAVACEAE

leaves 0.9–1.2 m long, 5–25 mm wide; inflorescence an exposed cylindrical spadix, 4–9 cm long,
diverging laterally from an elongate, leaf-like, spathe-like scape; flowers perfect, covering the
spadix; perianth of 6 short segments; stamens 6; carpels 2–3; fruit a few-seeded berry. Wet
ground or shallow water; Dallas Co., also Denton and Tarrant cos. (Mahler 1988). May–Jun. The
geographic origin of Acorus has been somewhat confused. The genus is apparently introduced
in TX, but was described as native in 1833 (Mahler 1988); Harper (1936) questioned whether
Acorus is native to the U.S.; Buell (1935), however, concluded that the genus is native to the inte-
rior of North America. According to J. Kartesz (pers. comm.), TX plants are introduced from the
Old World, with A. americanus (Raf.) Raf. extending no further s in the Great Plains than Ne-
braska and Iowa. Jones et al. (1997) treated TX material as A. americanus. This species has been
used medicinally since the time of Hippocrates; it was also known from Tutankhamun’s tomb;
it is used religiously as “oil of holy ointment” for anointing sacred items and referred to in Exo-
dus as SWEET CALAMUS; in Sumatra it is hung up at night to keep evil spirits from children; it is
also apparently effective as an insecticide (Mabberley 1997). Duke (1985) referenced sources in-
dicating that oil of calamus is carcinogenic, probably due to the presence of asarone (an
allylbenzene) or safrole; McGuffin et al. (1997) indicated asarone is potentially hepatocarcino-
genic and can cause chromosome damage in human lymphocytes. 9 I


                                             AGAVACEAE
              YUCCA, CENTURY-PLANT OR AGAVE FAMILY
Herbaceous or woody, usually xerophytic perennials from a pithy corm or soft-woody root;
leaves usually basal or bunched, narrow, flat to concave or thickened, ± fleshy or leathery, with
widened, clasping base; flowering stems with alternate leafy bracts; flowers in racemes or
panicles; tepals 6, in 1 or 2 rows; stamens 6; pistil 1; ovary superior or inferior; fruit a capsule.

AA medium-sized family (550 species in 18 genera—B. Hess, pers. comm.) mainly of arid or
semi-arid tropics and subtropics, especially in the Americas; its taxa have sometimes been
treated as Amaryllidaceae, Asteliaceae, Dracaenaceae, Liliaceae, or Nolinaceae; some authorities
(e.g., Heywood 1993) have suggested they may be more closely related to taxa in the Liliaceae
than to each other. Molecular studies (Bogler & Simpson 1995, 1996) indicated the family as
treated here is probably not monophyletic and supported the recognition of Nolinaceae and a
more narrowly circumscribed Agavaceae. Ornamentals include species of Agave, Dracaena ,
Sansevieria (MOTHER-IN-LAW’S-TONGUE), and Yucca. Family name from Agave, AGAVE, MAGUEY,
or CENTURY-PLANT, a genus of 100+ species native from the s United States to tropical South
America. Agave species are the source of sisal hemp and pulque, a Mexican “beer” distilled to
produce mescal and tequila. (Greek: agave, noble or admirable, in reference to the handsome
appearance when in flower) (subclass Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: usually xerophytic, typically robust perennials with often
elongate narrow leaves usually basal or crowded near base of stem (or at stem apex in large tree-
like YUCCAS) and sometimes sharp-pointed; inflorescence a raceme or panicle; fruit a capsule.
REFERENCES: Dahlgren et al. 1985; Bogler & Simpson 1995, 1996.

1. Flowers rosy red or salmon-colored; leaves conspicuously revolute (inrolled) upon drying (the
   margins nearly touching)                                                                          Hesperaloee
1. Flowers white to greenish or yellowish (can be reddish brown towards tips); leaves not revolute
   (can be v-shaped in Manfreda).
   2. Ovary superior; leaves usually 30 cm long or more OR if shorter with a hard spiny tip, not
      succulent (but can be thick), often < 4(–8) cm wide (but 3–8 cm wide in the large tree-like
      YUCCAS).
                                                                                  HESPERALOE/AGAVACEAE 1079

     3. Flowers 13–78+ mm long or broad; leaves 8–80 mm wide; capsules large (much > 1 cm
        long), the seeds numerous in each cell                                                              Yucca
                                                                                                                a
     3. Flowers 2.5–6 mm long or broad; leaves 2–12 mm wide; capsules small (< 1 cm long), the
        seeds solitary in each cell                                                                       Nolina
  2. Ovary inferior; leaves 10–30 cm long, without a hard spiny tip, succulent, 1–7(–10) cm wide        Manfreda


                                               HESPERALOE
AA genus of 5 species native to sw North America (Starr 1997). (Greek: hesperos, western or
evening, and the genus name Aloe)
REFERENCES: Trelease 1902; Starr 1995, 1997; Pellmyr & Augenstein 1997.

Hesperaloe parviflora (Torr.) J.M. Coult., (small-flowered), RED -FLOWERED -YUCCA , RED
HESPERALOE. Leaves numerous, crowded at base of plant, linear, to 1.2 m long; flowering stem to
2.5 m tall, usually few-branched; pedicels to 35 mm long; flowers tubular to oblong-campanu-
late, 25–35 mm long; stamens shorter than the corolla; style slightly to much exserted; capsules
to 3 cm or more long. Rocky slopes, open areas; Mills Co. in sw part of Lampasas Cut Plain, also
across the Colorado River in San Saba Co., also spreading from cultivation in Brown Co.
(Stanford 1976) and reported by Starr (1997) from Collin Co. [escaped?]; otherwise mostly much
further w in sw TX. Mar–Sep. [Yucca parviflora Torr.] The striking flower color immediately dis-
tinguishes this species from all other nc TX Agavaceae; it is widely used as an ornamental. Pol-
lination is reported to be by hummingbirds as well as bees (Starr 1995); experiments by Pellmyr
and Augenstein (1997) showed the species to be self-incompatible and pollinated by black-
chinned hummingbirds (Archilochus alexandri). m/92

                        MANFREDA FALSE ALOE, AMERICAN-ALOE
AA genus of 25 species ranging from the se United States to Honduras and El Salvador (B.
Hess, pers. comm.). The species have been variously recognized in Agave, Manfreda , and
Polianthes. (Named for Manfred, an ancient Italian writer)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1951f, 1966a; Verhoek-Williams 1975.

Manfreda virginica (L.) Rose, (of Virginia). Glabrous perennial; leaves mostly in a basal rosette, soft,
thick-herbaceous, somewhat fleshy; flowers in a spike-like raceme; perianth tubular-funnel-
form; anthers linear, versatile (= attached near middle); capsules 3-celled, oblong to globose, 14–
20 mm long, with numerous flattened seeds. The following key is modified from Shinners (1951f).

1. Leaves 12–18 cm long, (2–)3–8(–10) cm wide, 3–6 times as long as wide, 4–10 per plant; scape 6–
   10 mm thick near base, 3–5 mm at base of inflorescence; perianth (including ovary) 2.6–3.5 cm
   long, the lobes 2.5–3 mm wide at base; anthers 13–17(–20) mm long; flowering mid-Jun–mid- in
   Jul; nc TX mainly in the Blackland Prairie                                                           subsp. lata
1. Leaves (12–)15–30 cm long, 1–4.5 cm wide, 7–15 times as long as wide, ca. 10 per plant; scape 4–
   7 mm thick near base, 1.5–3.5 mm at base of inflorescence; perianth (including ovary) 2–2.3 cm
   long, the lobes 1.5 mm wide at base; anthers 8–10 mm long; flowering mid-Jul–mid-Aug; wooded
   areas                                                                                           subsp. virginica

subsp. lata (Shinners) O’Kennon, Diggs, and Lipscomb, comb. nov. BASIONYM : Agave lata
Shinners, Field & Lab. 19:171–173. 1951. TYPE: TEXAS. Grayson Co.: 4.7 miles south of Sherman,
H.V Daly 61, 15 Jun 1951, (HOLOTYPE: BRIT/SMU), (broad), WIDE-LEAF FALSE ALOE. Plant 0.6–1.7 m
tall (to tip of inflorescence); corm pithy; leaves 4–10, noticeably fleshy, green to bluish gray-
green, occasionally with reddish splotches near base, elliptic or broadly lanceolate, deeply con-
cave, glabrous, margins scabrous; pedicels shorter than subtending bracts; flowers spicy-
scented; perianth greenish or yellowish with dots or tinge of red-brown toward tips, the lobes
1080 AGAVACEAE/NOLINA

5–8 mm long; filaments green with reddish pigmentation; anthers exserted, cream-colored.
Mainly Blackland Prairie; s Grayson (apparently now extinct locally), Hunt, and Kaufman cos.,
also Parker Co. (R. O’Kennon pers. obs.); otherwise apparently known only from s Oklahoma.
Jun–Jul. [Agave lata Shinners, Polianthes lata (Shinners) Shinners] This taxon was named as a
species in the genus Agave by Shinners (1951f) and subsequently transferred to Polianthes
(Shinners 1966a). Verhoek-Williams (1975) placed it in the genus Manfreda but lumped it with
the more widespread M. virginica (L.) Rose. By the time of Verhoek-Williams’ study, the
Grayson Co. site was apparently no longer in existence and no other TX sites were known.
Since that time, several new Blackland Prairie populations with hundreds or even thousands of
individuals have been discovered. While there is undoubtedly overlap in most of the characters
distinguishing this subspecies from subsp. virginica, we agree with Shinners (1951f) that it is a
geographically distinct entity; subspecific status appears most appropriate. Detailed taxonomic
work on the large Blackland Prairie populations is needed. m/98

subsp. virginica, (of Virginia), FALSE ALOE, RATTLESNAKE-MASTER, VIRGINIA AGAVE. Leaves lan-
ceolate to somewhat oblong-spatulate, nearly flat. Tarrant Co. (Fort Worth Nature Center; it is
not completely certain that this popualtion is native) and Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly se and
e TX. Used by Native Americans as an antidote for snakebite, giving rise to the common name.

Manfreda maculosa (Hook.) Rose, (spotted), cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4
(Fig. 2), is an endemic to sc TX and apparently occurs only to the s of nc TX. It can be distin-
guished by its longer perianth (including ovary nearly 5 cm long) with longer lobes (10–19 mm
long). E

Agave americana L., (of America), the CENTURY-PLANT, is cultivated in nc TX and long persists;
it has large glaucous-gray leaves with a long (2.5–5 cm) terminal spine and a paniculate inflo-
rescence 5–7 m tall.

                                       NOLINA BEAR-GRASS
Polygamo-dioecious perennials with woody crown; leaves numerous, basal, clustered, linear,
with margins smooth or serrulate; panicle pedunculate; perianth small, white, of 6 segments;
stamens 6; pistil 1.

AA mainly sw North American genus of 30 species; some are used as ornamentals. John
Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) is currently treating Nolina in the Liliaceae; other authorities place
it in its own family, the Nolinaceae (e.g., Dahlgren et al. 1985); B. Hess (pers. comm.) has indi-
cated that in the forthcoming treatment for Flora of North America, it will be included in the
Agavaceae. Molecular analyses (Bogler & Simpson 1995, 1996) indicate that Nolina, Dasylirion,
Beaucarnea , and Calibanus are a monophyletic group and support the recognition of the
Nolinaceae. (Named for P.C. Nolin, an 18th century French agriculturalist)
REFERENCES: Trelease 1911; Bogler & Simpson 1995, 1996.

1. Leaves 4–12 mm wide, flattened in cross-section, the margins strongly serrulate; inflorescence
   held well above the leaves                                                                 N. lindheimeriana
1. Leaves 2–4(–7) mm wide, roundish with one flattened side in cross-section, the margins smooth
   to remotely toothed; inflorescence among the leaves                                                 N. texana

Nolina lindheimeriana (Scheele) S. Watson, (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1809–1879, Ger-
man-born TX collector), RIBBON-GRASS, DEVIL’S-SHOESTRING, LINDHEIMER’S NOLINA. Perennial 60–
180 cm tall, with woody crown; leaves narrow and elongate, flat, soft, with smooth surfaces and
serrulate margins with the teeth directed forward. Limestone outcrops, in sun or shade; Bell (J.
Stanford, pers. comm.) and Somervell (Mahler 1988) cos., also Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—
Sanchez 1997); mainly Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Apr–May. E
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1081




   Acorus calamus [GLE ]

                               Hesperaloe parviflora [ CUR]             Manfreda virginica subsp. virginica [LAM]




Nolina lindheimeriana [LYN]           Nolina texana [LYN]                      Manfreda virginica subsp. lata [HEA]




       Yucca arkansana [LYN]                                  Yucca constricta [LYN, SA3]
1082 AGAVACEAE/YUCCA

Nolina texana S. Watson, (of Texas), SACAHUISTA, BUNCH-GRASS. Perennial 30–60 cm tall; leaves
narrow, elongate, almost rounded-triangular in cross-section, the margins smooth or with dis-
tant teeth. Rocky soils; Brown (HPC) and Hamilton (Mahler 1988) cos., also Fort Hood (Bell or
Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); w part of nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr. The flowers are poisonous
and potentially fatal to livestock; liver-kidney toxicity and photosensitization are involved
(Sperry et al. 1955; Kingsbury 1964). This species is normally avoided by livestock but will be
eaten if no other food is available (J. Stanford, pers. comm.). 9

                   YUCCA BEAR-GRASS, SPANISH-BAYONET, SOAPWEED
Plants coarse, with one to many crowns of narrow, elongate leaves, in nc TX species these usu-
ally in a basal cluster or at ends of very short trunk-like stems or in 2 species at ends of elongate
trunk-like stems; flowers in terminal racemes or panicles; flowering stems with wide-based,
acute or acuminate, somewhat papery bracts; flowers rather large; perianth drooping, of 6
thick, white to cream-colored or greenish segments (can be tinged with purple in 2 species);
fruits dehiscent capsules or in 2 species indehiscent, erect when dry or in 2 species pendant.

AA genus of 35 species (B. Hess, pers. comm.) of warm areas of North America. YUCCAS were
used by Native Americans as a source of food, fiber, soap, and medicine; the spiny tip was ap-
parently used as a needle, often with the still attached fibers serving as thread (Churchill
1986c); 2,000 year old fiber and twine from YUCCA have been found in Native American ruins
in AZ; according to Bell and Castetter (in Webber 1953), “. . . yucca ranked foremost among the
wild plants utilized by the inhabitants of the Southwest. It holds this place because of the great
variety of uses to which it could be put and to the wide accessibility of this genus within the
Southwest.” During World Wars I and II, large amounts of YUCCA were harvested in TN and NM
for fiber (Webber 1953). All species are dependant on yucca moths for pollination; if the moths
are not present the plants reproduce vegetatively; as a result, large clonal populations are often
encountered in the field (K. Clary, pers. comm.). According to Powell (1988), “The Yucca Moth
(Tegeticula = Pronuba) flies at dusk to a flower where she climbs stamens to collect pollen and
pack the pollen in a large ball-like mass under her neck. She then visits another flower where
she inserts her ovipositer directly through the ovary wall and deposits 20–30 eggs, one at a
time, each directly into an ovule. She then climbs to the stigma of the same flower and spreads
the pollen, thus ensuring pollination, subsequent fertilization, and developing seeds that pro-
vide nourishment for the moth larvae. Each larva ultimately destroys the seed in which it
grows, but there are many undamaged seeds left in the yucca capsule.” Baker (1986) described
some of the complexities of pollination in Yucca. (A native Haitian name)

In addition to the species discussed below, several other YUCCAS are cultivated in nc TX (par-
ticularly the sw part) including 3 with trunk-like stems; these are Y. aloifolia L. (leaves dark
green, stiff, spear-like, without marginal threads; in contrast to all other species, the leaves are
arranged along the full length of the trunk instead of in well-defined leaf rosette); Y. rostrata
Engelm. ex Trel. (leaves glaucous, flexible, the margins denticulate); and Y. thompsoniana Trel.
(leaves glaucous, flexible, much shorter than in Y. rostrata, the margins denticulate) [now some-
times treated as a synonym of Y. rostrata ]. Yucca filamentosa L. and Y. flaccida Haw., both with
drooping leaves and usually without trunk-like stems or trunk-like stems very short, are also
widely used in landscaping in nc TX. They are sometimes lumped as Y. filamentosa, but can be
distinguished by the leaf margins shredding into threads in Y. filamentosa, while not shredding
in Y. flaccida.
REFERENCES: Trelease 1902; McKelvey 1938, 1947; Webber 1953.

1. Plants with leaves in a crown at ends of 1–4(–8) trunk-like stems 1.5–4.3 m tall; leaves broad, 3–8
   cm wide, stiff and spear-like, thickish; fruits indehiscent, eventually drooping; sw margin of nc TX,
   mainly Edwards Plateau s and w to s TX and Trans-Pecos.
                                                                                          YUCCA/AGAVACEAE 1083

   2. Leaves with marginal threads, the margins not denticulate, the apical portion of leaves usually
      rolled inward so that margins nearly touch; ovary slender for its length, not over 7 mm in diam.
      at flowering time                                                                                      Y. torreyi
   2. Leaves without marginal threads, the margins not denticulate, the apical portion of leaves not
      inrolled; ovary stout for its length, 7–12 mm in diam. at flowering time                         Y. treculeana
1. Plants with leaves in a basal cluster (without visible stems) or at ends of very short trunk-like
   stems; leaves usually narrower, 0.8–4 cm wide, not as above; fruits dehiscent at maturity, not
   drooping; widespread in nc TX.
   3. Leaf margins yellowish to dark orangish red or reddish brown, smooth or minutely toothed,
      not shredding into threads; pistil 3.2–4.5 mm long.
      4. Leaves straight or nearly so, not with strongly inrolled margins, usually pale bluish to sage
         green, conspicuously glaucous, ± smooth on both surfaces; leaf margins yellowish, flat             Y. pallida
      4. Leaves twisted, with margins inrolled most of their length, dark green, not glaucous, ±
         scabrous on both surfaces; leaf margins usually dark orangish red or reddish brown or
         occasionally yellowish, wavy                                                                      Y. rupicola
   3. Leaf margins whitish, shredding into prominent white threads (these often disappearing late
      in year); pistil 2–3.2 cm long.
      5. Inflorescence a much branched panicle, beginning well above tips of leaves (separated
         from them by nearly its own length or more of naked scape); fruits constricted near middle
         or not so; in nc TX mainly in West Cross Timbers.
         6. Leaves very slender, 8–15 mm wide, 100–200 per strikingly globose rosette; fruits usually
            conspicuously constricted near middle; on limestone substrates                              Y. constricta
         6. Leaves usually 15–40 mm wide, ca. 50–85 per rosette (rosette not globose in appear-
            ance); fruits usually not conspicuously constricted; on sandy substrates                     Y. necopina
      5. Inflorescence usually unbranched and raceme-like or with 1 or 2 short, spreading branches
         near base (these often soon deciduous), beginning below to just above leaf tips (separated
         from them by less than its own length of naked scape); fruits not contricted near middle;
         widespread in nc TX                                                                           Y. arkansana

Yucca arkansana Trel., (of Arkansas), ARKANSAS YUCCA. Leaves 20–60 cm long, the blades 1–2.5
cm wide, the margins at first white, papery with curly fibers; perianth 32–65 mm long, greenish
white, globose; capsules ca. 4–7 cm long. Rocky limestone or sandy soils; se and e TX w to east-
ern Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Late Apr–mid-May.

Hybrids of Y. arkansana and Y. pallida have been found on limestone in Dallas (McKelvey 1947),
at Glen Rose in Somervell Co. (Shinners 1958), and recently in Tarrant County at Tandy Hills Park.
The Tandy Hills plants vary from having leaves with curly fibers on the margins to not so, from
having leaf margins white to yellowish, and from having inflorescences branched to sparsely
branched or unbranched. In general, the plants were from 1–1.5 m tall. This population of hun-
dreds of individuals over a number of acres was quite variable with individuals ranging from
much like typical Y. arkansana to those much like Y. pallida and a full spectrum of intermediates.

Yucca constricta Buckley, (constricted), BUCKLEY’S YUCCA. Usually stemless, rarely with trunk-
like stems to 40 cm tall; overall aspect of basal leafy portion almost ball-like in outline; leaves
30–65 cm long, very slender, 100–200 per rosette, very straight but flexible, the margins white
or green with fibers that soon erode away; perianth pale greenish white; panicle branches gla-
brous. Limestone outcrops or rocky prairies; Callahan, Coleman, and Erath cos., also Brown Co.
(HPC); West Cross Timbers s and w to w TX; endemic to TX. Apr–Jun. E

D Yucca necopina Shinners, (unexpected), GLEN ROSE YUCCA. Similar to Y. arkansana vegeta-
tively, but taller (1–3 m tall) and with large, much-branched inflorescences held well above the
leaves; leaves 50–80 cm long, typically 1.5–4 cm wide, the margins white, with curly fibers; in-
1084 AGAVACEAE/YUCCA

florescences completely glabrous; flowers greenish white. Previously known only from a sandy
fencerow on Brazos River terrace near Glen Rose, Somervell Co. (Shinners 1958a); recently re-
discovered by R. O’Kennon along Brazos River terraces in Hood and Somervell cos. and in deep
sand in Parker and Tarrant cos.; these populations number in the hundreds of individuals; ap-
parently endemic to nc TX but should be looked for in s OK. This is the common YUCCA of
sandy soils in the West Cross Timbers in nc TX. May–Jun. Shinners thought this to be possibly a
hybrid between Y. pallida and Y. arkansana but unlike an evident hybrid of these 2 species ob-
served nearby (Shinners 1958a). Recent field observations of large numbers of relatively uni-
form individuals in widely separated populations—in sandy areas where neither Y. arkansana
or Y. pallida typically occur—support the recognition of this entity at the specific level. Molecu-
lar evidence (K. Clary, pers. comm.) also supports specific recognition. Bill Hess (pers. comm.)) is
treating this species as a synonym of Y. arkansana in his treatment of Yucca for Flora North
America. The closest relative of Y. necopina seems to be Y. louisianensis Trel. (to be treated as Y.
flaccida Haw. by B. Hess (pers. comm.), which is distinguished by its usually narrower leaves
and pubescent inflorescences. Vines (1960) cited Y. louisianensis for Dallas and Fort Worth;
these records are likely to be of Y. necopina. The genus is in need of more detailed field study in
nc Texas. (TOES 1993: V) m E m/107

D Yucca pallida McKelvey, (pale), PALE YUCCA, PALE-LEAF YUCCA. Plant 1.3–2.5 m tall to tip of
inflorescence; leaves 18–35 cm long, 2–4 cm wide, conspicuously glaucous, margins corneous (=
horn-like texture); panicle narrowly to widely branched; perianth segments with pale greenish
center and white edges. Limestone outcrops or rocky prairies; Grand Prairie and Blackland
Prairie (Dallas, on the Austin Chalk); endemic to nc TX or possibly slightly onto the Edwards
Plateau. May–Jun. E

Yucca rupicola Scheele, (growing on cliffs or ledges), TEXAS YUCCA, TWIST-LEAF YUCCA. Similar to
Y. pallida; leaves 20–60 cm long; perianth segments whitish or greenish white. Limestone
ledges, plains; Bell Co. in s part of nc TX; mainly Edwards Plateau; endemic to TX. Apr–Jun. E

Yucca torreyi Shafer, (for John Torrey, 1796–1873, American botanist, physician, and collector of
many w North American plants), TORREY’S YUCCA, SPANISH-DAGGER. Stems unbranched or
rarely with 2–3 branches; dead leaves reflexed on trunk below leaf crown; leaves 30–110 cm
long, light green, stiff, spear-like, with marginal threads; panicle with 10–50% of its total length
extending beyond the leaves or rarely entirely within the leaves; perianth subglobose or cam-
panulate, sometimes fully expanding, cream (can be tinged with purple); fruits 7–14 cm long,
indehiscent, slightly pulpy. Gravelly soils, grassy and chaparral mesas and slopes; Brown and
Burnet cos. (HPC) on sw margin of nc TX; mainly Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Late Mar–
May. This species is sometimes treated as a synonym of the related Y. treculeana (e.g., Powell
1988); according to Webber (1953) and Correll & Johnston (1970), the two sometimes hybridize;
they can usually be readily distinguished in the field; we are following McKelvey (1938),
Kartesz (1994), Jones et al. (1997), and J. Kartesz (pers. comm., 1997) in recognizing them at the
specific level. [Y. baccata Torr. var. macrocarpa Torr., Y. crassifolia Engelm., Y. macrocarpa (Torr.)
Coville]

Yucca treculeana Carr., (for A.A.L. Trécul, 1818–1896, who took plants of this species to France in
1850—Vines 1960), TRECUL’S YUCCA, SPANISH-DAGGER, SPANISH-BAYONET, DON QUIXOTE’S-LANCE,
PITA, PALMA PITA, PALMA DE DÁTILES, PALMA LOCA, TEXAS-BAYONET. Stems few-branched, with leaf
crown at apex; dead leaves reflexed on trunk below leaf crown (trunks bare of dead leaves on
old plants); leaves 50–100 cm long, without marginal threads; panicle with ca. 50–75% of its to-
tal length extending beyond the leaves; perianths broadly globose or hemispherical, greenish
cream to cream (can be lightly tinged with purple); fruits 5–11.5 cm long, indehiscent, the flesh
                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1085




                                        Yucca rupicola [LYN]




  Yucca pallida [HEA]




Yucca torreyi [VIN]         Yucca necopina [HEA]
1086 ALISMATACEAE/ALISMA

sweetish and succulent. Brushland; Burnet Co. (Buckley in McKelvey 1938; also R. O’Kennon,
pers. obs.), also known just s of nc TX in San Saba Co. (Buckley in McKelvey 1938) and Travis Co.
(Tharp letter quoted in McKelvey 1938); Trans-Pecos and se and s TX n to Edwards Plateau near
s margin of nc TX. Feb–Apr. The spines were used to jab a snake bite and induce bleeding in or-
der to flush away the poison (Vines 1960). Pioneers cooked and prepared the flowers like cab-
bage and also pickled them (Schulz 1922; McKelvey 1938; Crosswhite 1980). According to
Havard (1896), the flesy, banana-like fruits are delicious, contain considerable sugar, and were
converted by Chihuahua Indians into a fermented beverage. Long fibers obtained by macerat-
ing the leaves were used in the past to make ropes (Crosswhite 1980).


                                           ALISMATACEAE
              ARROWHEAD OR WATER-PLANTAIN FAMILY
Wet ground or aquatic, annual or perennial herbs, largely glabrous, with milky sap; leaves
basal, sometimes dimorphic with different submerged (linear and bladeless) and emergent
(generally with distinct blades) forms; leaf blades entire, linear to ovate-elliptic, or triangular
and with basal lobes (= sagittate), longitudinally ribbed (midrib more prominent than others)
and with cross-veins; flowers whorled, in scapose racemes or panicles, perfect or imperfect; se-
pals 3, green; petals 3, white or rarely pink, equal; stamens 6 to many; pistils many, on a swollen
or elongating receptacle; ovary superior with basal placentation; fruits achenes in our species.

AA small (ca. 75 species in 11 genera) nearly cosmopolitan (Haynes & Holm-Nielsen 1994), but
especially n temperate family of aquatic or wet area plants with most species found in the New
World. Molecular analyses (Duvall et al. 1993) indicate that the Alismataceae is phylogeneti-
cally near the base of the monocotyledons. (subclass Alismatidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: wet area or aquatic herbs with milky sap and basal, often
broad, usually distinctly petiolate leaves; flowers whorled, in scapose racemes or panicles, with
3 green sepals, 3 white or rarely pink petals, and numerous separate carpels (and later achenes).
REFERENCES: Small 1909; Beal 1960; Rogers 1983; Dahlgren et al. 1985; Haynes & Holm-Nielsen 1994.

1. Carpels (and later achenes) in a single ring on the receptacle; stamens 6; leaf blades never sagit-
   tate (cuneate to cordate at base); extreme ne part of nc TX                                                Alisma
1. Carpels (and later achenes) densely crowded over surface of receptacle forming a head-like
   mass; stamens usually > 6 (often numerous); leaf blades variable in shape, sometimes sagittate;
   widespread in nc TX.
   2. Fruiting heads rough in appearance, resembling a bur (due to the conspicuous persistent
      styles on the achenes); achenes turgid, ribbed or ridged, not membranous-winged; flowers
      perfect; leaf blades never sagittate                                                               Echinodorus
   2. Fruiting heads not bur-like (except somewhat bur-like in S. brevirostra); achenes flattened,
      membranous-winged; flowers perfect or imperfect, at least the lower imperfect; leaf blades
      sagittate OR not so                                                                                  Sagittaria


                                      ALISMA WATER-PLANTAIN
AA n temperate and Australian genus of 9 species. (Greek: alisma, water-plantain)
REFERENCES: Fernald 1946a; Hendrick 1958; Voss 1958; Pogan 1963.

Alisma subcordatum Raf., (slightly cordate), WATER-PLANTAIN, SMALL-FLOWER WATER-PLANTAIN,
MUD-PLANTAIN. Emergent perennial; stems erect; leaves basal; leaf blades ovate to elliptic,
broadly cuneate to subcordate at base, to 12(–15) cm long and 8(–10) cm wide, long-petioled;
inflorescences to 60(–100) cm tall, panicled, with whorled branches; flowers perfect; petals
                                                                            ECHINODORUS/ALISMATACEAE 1087

white or pinkish, 1–3 mm long, suborbicular; receptacle flattened, including achenes the whole
structure 4 mm wide or less; achenes 1–2 mm long, wingless, smooth, with a single dorsal
groove. Shallow water; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly e TX. Jun–Sep. [A. plantago-aquatica L.
var. parviflorum (Pursh) Torr.]

                                     ECHINODORUS BURHEAD
Ours emergent annuals or perennials; leaves long-petioled; leaf blades with arcuate veins promi-
nent below; inflorescences usually much exceeding the leaves, with flowers in whorls; flowers
perfect; petals white; stamens ca. 12–20; fruiting heads rough in appearance, resembling a bur
(due to the conspicuous persistent styles on the achenes); achenes turgid, ribbed or ridged, beaked.

AA genus of 26 species extending from the n U.S. to Argentina and Chile (Haynes & Holm-
Nielsen 1994); some are cultivated as ornamental aquarium plants. (Greek: echinus, rough husk,
and doros, a leather bottle, applied to the ovary, which is in most species armed with the persis-
tent style, forming a sort of prickly head of fruits)
REFERENCES: Fassett 1955; Haynes & Holm-Nielsen 1986.

1. Inflorescences rigidly erect at maturity; veins of sepals smooth; stamens usually 12–15; flowers
   6–11 mm across                                                                                      E. berteroi
1. Inflorescences erect when young but later becoming prostrate and rooting at nodes; veins of
   sepals usually with papillose or roughened ridges; stamens usually 20–22; flowers 10–25 mm
   across                                                                                           E. cordifolius

Echinodorus berteroi (Spreng.) Fassett, (for C.G.L. Bertero, 1789–1831, Italian physician who
botanized in West Indies), BURHEAD, ERECT BURHEAD. Coarse annual or short-lived perennial
with scapes to 80 cm tall; leaves variable, those of mature plants with blades broadly ovate, 3–
18 cm long, subcordate to truncate or broadly cuneate at base; secretory tissue visible as pellu-
cid (= clearish, somewhat transparent) line-like markings conspicuous in dried leaves when
backlit with strong light; inflorescences with flowers in whorls of 3–9; achenes 2–3 mm long.
Mud and shallow water; Dallas, Denton, Grayson, Montague, and Parker cos., also Bell, Coryell
(Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997), Brown, Comanche, and Hamilton cos. (HPC); widespread in TX.
May–Oct. [E. berteroi var. lanceolatus (Engelm. ex S. Watson & J.M. Coult.) Fassett, E. rostratus
(Nutt.) Engelm. ex A. Gray]

Echinodorus cordifolius (L.) Griseb. subsp. fluitans (Fassett) R.R. Haynes & Holm-Niels., (sp.:
with heart-shaped leaves; subsp.: floating), CREEPING BURHEAD. Annual or short-lived perennial;
leaf blades broadly ovate, 2–14(–20+) cm long; pellucid markings usually absent or not con-
spicuous; inflorescences with flowers in whorls of 5–15, to 1.2 m long, often producing plantlets
at tips; achenes ca. 2–3.5 mm long. Mud and shallow water; Tarrant Co., also Brown (Stanford
1971) and Hamilton (HPC) cos. in w part of nc TX and Lamar Co. (Carr 1994) in Red River
drainage; also se and e TX and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Nov. We are following Haynes & Holm-
Nielsen (1994) and Jones et al. (1997) in recognizing the TX material of this species as subsp.
fluitans. [E. fluitans Fassett]

                                    SAGITTARIA ARROWHEAD
Mostly perennial, aquatic or semi-aquatic, rhizomatous herbs, usually emergent when flower-
ing; leaves varying with environmental conditions (particularly depth of water) and season;
leaf blades unlobed or sagittate; petioles long and spongy; submerged leaves typically bladeless;
inflorescences usually erect or sometimes procumbent, branched or unbranched; flowers in
whorls of 3, pedicelled, bracteate, mostly imperfect or sometimes perfect; petals white; stamens
numerous; achenes flattened, membranous-winged, beaked.
1088 ALISMATACEAE/SAGITTARIA

AA predominantly New World genus of ca. 25 species, ranging from Canada s to Argentina
and Chile; 3–4 species also occur in Eurasia (Haynes & Holm-Nielsen 1994); often tuberiferous
herbs of aquatic habitats; the tubers are edible in a number of species; some exhibit leaf poly-
morphism—the submerged leaves ribbon-shaped, the floating ones with ovate blades, the
emergent ones with sagittate blades. (Latin: sagitta, an arrow, from the leaf shape of some species)
REFERENCES: Smith 1895; Bogin 1955; Wooten 1973; Beal et al. 1982.

1. Leaf blades not sagittate, without lobes; filaments usually pubescent OR glabrous in 1 species
   that is rare in nc TX.
   2. Stalks of fruiting heads recurved; bracts of inflorescence smooth, thinly membranous; filaments
      pubescent; common and widespread in nc TX                                                         S. platyphylla
   2. Stalks of fruiting heads ascending or spreading, not recurved; bracts of inflorescence thick-
      ened and papillose or coarsely ridged; filaments pubescent OR glabrous; rare, if present in nc
      TX probably limited to extreme e margin.
      3. Filaments glabrous; leaves ± phyllodial (= petiole and blade indistinct), enlarged-spongy at
         base, tapering to linear or narrowly lanceolate blade-like portion; achenes 1–1.5 mm long
                                                                                                           S. papillosa
      3. Filaments pubescent; leaves with long petioles and definite blades (elliptic to lanceolate or
         rarely ovate); achenes 1.8–2.2 mm long                                                            S. lancifolia
1. Leaf blades usually sagittate, with conspicuous projecting lobes basally; filaments glabrous.
   4. Sepals of pistillate flowers (when in fruit) 5–14 mm long, appressed or spreading; pedicels
      recurved and noticeably thickened; petioles terete; most flowers perfect; rare if present in nc
      TX                                                                                            S. montevidensis
   4. Sepals of pistillate flowers (when in fruit) 4–7 mm long, reflexed; pedicels ascending or if re-
      curved then not noticeably thickened; petioles angular; few or no flowers perfect; widespread
      in nc TX.
      5. Basal lobes of leaf commonly twice as long as blade body, typically narrow, usually < 2(–2.5)
         cm wide                                                                                          S. longiloba
      5. Basal lobes of leaf seldom much longer than blade body, narrow to typically much wider,
         usually much > 2.5 cm wide.
         6. Lower floral bracts triangular-ovate, obtuse or acute, 5–12 mm long; achene beak pro-
            jecting ± horizontally or slightly downcurved, the wing of the achene extending ±
            smoothly to upper surface of beak                                                               S. latifolia
         6. Lower floral bracts lanceolate to narrowly triangular, acuminate, 12–30 mm long; achene
            beak projecting upward at an angle, the wing of the achene not extending smoothly to
            upper of the beak, with a definite interruption (“saddle”-like)                             S. brevirostra a

Sagittaria brevirostra Mack. & Bush, (short-beaked). Leaves to 0.6 m long; leaf blades to 30 cm
long and 20 cm wide (usually smaller); sepals reflexed from fruiting aggregate; achene beak
broad-based, up to 1.5 mm long. Rivers, ditches, other wet areas; Dallas, Ellis, and Grayson cos.;
also se TX. Jun–Aug.

Sagittaria lancifolia L., (lance-leaved), SCYTHE-FRUIT ARROWHEAD. Leaf blades to 40 cm long and
10 cm wide; bracts of inflorescence striate to strongly papillose, to 35 mm long; sepals reflexed
from fruiting aggregate; beak of achene inserted obliquely near apex of achene, to 0.8 mm long,
ascending. Swamps, marshes, or other wet areas; included based on citation of vegetational area
4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX; according to R. Haynes (pers. comm.), this is
a coastal species that probably does not occur in nc TX. May–Nov. [S. falcata Pursh, S. lancifolia
var. media P. Micheli]

Sagittaria latifolia Willd., (broad-leaved), COMMON ARROWHEAD, DUCK-POTATO, WAPATO. Leaves
to 1.5 m long; leaf blades to 50 cm long, mostly sagittate, the lobes varying from narrow to del-
                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1089




                        Yucca treculeana [PES, SA2]                                                 Alisma subcordatum [BB2]




                                                Echinodorus berteroi [BEA]                          Sagittaria brevirostra [CO 1]




                                                                 ACHENE                            ANTHER                BRACTS



Echinodorus cordifolius subsp. fluitans [FLN]                           Sagittaria lancifolia [ARM, CO 1]
1090 ARACEAE

toid; bracts to 15 mm long; sepals reflexed from fruiting aggregate, to 10 mm long; petals to ca.
20 mm long; achene beak broad-based, up to 2 mm long. Lakes, ponds, or other wet areas;
Denton, Grayson, and Parker cos.; widespread in TX. May–Aug. The tuberous roots were used as
food by Native Americans (Erichsen-Brown 1979).

Sagittaria longiloba Engelm. ex J.G. Sm., (long-lobed), LONG-LOBE ARROWHEAD, LONG-BARB AR-
ROWHEAD, FLECHA DE AGUA. Leaves to 0.8 m long; leaf blades to 22 cm long, 0.5–2.5 cm wide;
bracts usually < 15 mm long; sepals 4–7 mm long, reflexed from fruiting aggregate; petals to ca.
14 mm long; achene beak projecting horizontally, triangular, tiny, to 0.15 mm long or obsolete.
Ponds, swamps, ditches, or other wet areas; Brown (Mahler 1988) and Hamilton (Stanford 1971)
cos.; mainly s and w TX. Apr–Nov. Native Americans and early settlers used the tuberous roots
as food; they were called duck potatoes or swan potatoes (Kirkpatrick 1992).

Sagittaria montevidensis Cham. & Schltdl. subsp. calycina (Engelm.) Bogin, (sp:. presumably of
Montevideo, Uruguay; subsp.: calyx-like), GIANT ARROWHEAD. Leaves to 1 m long; leaf blades 3–
40 cm long, 2–25 cm wide; bracts ca. 10 mm long; sepals appressed around fruiting aggregate or
spreading; achenes to 2.5 mm long and 1.3 mm wide, the beak horizontal or oblique, narrowly
winged, ca. as long as the achene is wide. Lakes, ponds, other wet areas; included based on dis-
tribution map (without counties) in Beal et al. (1982) and on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig.
2) by Hatch et al. (1990), also Brown Co. (HPC); mainly e TX and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct.
While this taxon is sometimes (e.g., Kartesz 1994) recognized as a separate species [S. calycina
Engelm.], we are following Haynes and Holm-Nielsen (1994) and Jones et al. (1997) in treating it
as a subspecies of S. montevidensis.

Sagittaria papillosa Buchenau, (with papillae or nipple-like structures), NIPPLE-BRACT ARROW-
HEAD. Leaf blades to 25 cm long and 5 cm wide (usually narrower); bracts of inflorescence
densely papillose, 3–10 mm long; sepals reflexed from fruiting aggregate; petals to ca. 12 mm
long; beak of achene inserted laterally above middle of achene, ca. 0.2 mm long, projecting hori-
zontally or recurving. Swamps, marshes, or other wet areas; included based on citation of veg-
etational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX. Mar–Nov.

Sagittaria platyphylla (Engelm.) J.G. Sm., (broad-leaved), DELTA ARROWHEAD. Leaf blades 8–20
cm long, 2–8 cm wide, rarely with lateral projection(s) from the base; bracts 3–8 mm long, pis-
tillate pedicels recurved; sepals 4–6 mm long, appressed around fruiting aggregate; beak subu-
late, 0.3 mm or more long, projecting upward at an angle. Swamps, marshes, ponds, or other wet
areas; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Oct. [S. graminea Michx. var.
platyphylla Engelm.] This is the most common Sagittaria species in nc TX.


            ARACEAE CALLA, ARUM, OR AROID FAMILY
Ours glabrous, herbaceous, rooted perennials with basal, simple or compound, entire leaves or 1
species a free-floating aquatic; inflorescence a fleshy spike (= spadix) with a sometimes highly
modified leafy bract (= spathe) subtending or enclosing it; flowers very small, without perianth
or with a few minute scales, imperfect; staminate flowers in upper part of spike, with 1–10 sta-
mens, their filaments very short or absent; pistillate flowers in basal part of spike, each with 1
pistil; ovary superior.

AA large (2,550 species in 104–105 genera), mainly tropical and subtropical (a few in temper-
ate zones) family of mainly perennial herbs or vines. 9 Many have tissues containing raphides
(bundles of microscopic, needle-like calcium oxalate crystals) that can cause injury to the
mouth, throat, or hands by puncturing cell membranes; the plants are also often cyanogenic or
contain alkaloids, free oxalic acid, or other toxins; some are potentially fatally poisonous
(McIntire et al. 1992; Woodland 1997). Philodendron, one of the most popular house plants in
                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1091


                                                               LEAF BLADE
                                                                VARIATION




                                     ?




                             Sagittaria latifolia [MAS]                          Sagittaria longiloba [CO1]




Sagittaria montevidensis subsp. calycina [CO1]




        Sagittaria papillosa [CO1]                         Sagittaria platyphylla [AMB]
1092 ARACEAE/ARISAEMA

the U.S., has raphides and questionable unidentified proteins and can cause painful burning to
the mouth and throat and contact dermatitis; ingestion of the leaves is highly toxic to cats; the
plants should not be left within reach of children or pets (Lampe & McCann 1985; Spoerke &
Smolinske 1990). Dieffenbachia (DUMBCANE), another common house plant, contains raphides
and the alkaloid protoanemonine; ingestion causes swelling of the pharynx and larynx and
can result in death through suffocation (Morton 1982); its common name is derived from its
ability to paralyze the vocal cords and render people speechless. Food crops include the edible
starchy corms of Colocasia (TARO) and Xanthosma (TANIER); ornamentals include Anthurium,
Caladium, Dieffenbachia, Monstera, and Philodendron. Some species can produce heat in the
inflorescences which volatilizes odors to attract pollinators. The genus Acorus, traditionally
placed in the Araceae, is here recognized in the Acoraceae. Family name from Arum, a genus of
26 species of Europe and the Mediterranean area. (Greek: aron, the classical name of these
plants) (subclass Arecidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbaceous perennials (also 1 floating aquatic) with numer-
ous very small flowers in an often finger-like spadix subtended by a sheath-like spathe; leaves
usually basal, with expanded blades, often with net venation.
REFERENCES: Birdsey 1951; Wilson 1960a; Jacobsen 1985; Bogner & Nicolson 1991; Grayum 1990,
1992.

1. Plants free-floating aquatics; leaves 3–15 cm long; spathes ca. 15 mm long; pistillate flower
   solitary at base of inflorescence                                                                            Pistia
1. Plants rooted in soil (even when in water); leaves often much longer; spathes much > 15 mm
   long; pistillate or perfect flowers several to many.
   2. Leaves compound with 3–15 leaflets                                                                    Arisaema
   2. Leaves simple.
      3. Leaf blades narrow (5–25 mm wide), grass-like, parallel-veined                         Acorus (see Acoraceae)
      3. Leaf blades broad (much greater than 25 mm wide), not at all grass-like, net-veined.
         4. Leaves peltate (= the petiole attached on the lower leaf surface away from the margin);
            leaf blades cordate to sagittate or hastate at base, with a purplish spot on the upper
            epidermis above where the petiole attaches to the blade; spathes yellow                         Colocasia
         4. Leaves not peltate; leaf blades sagittate at base, without a purplish spot; spathes creamy
            white                                                                                        Xanthosoma


                                 ARISAEMA JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT
AA genus of 150 species of e Africa, Arabia, tropical and e Asia, and North America. 9 All
parts of Arisaema contain microscopic crystals of calcium oxalate, which if eaten disrupt cells
and cause extreme burning and swelling of the mouth and throat (Stephens 1980; Cheatham &
Johnston 1995). (Greek: aris, a kind of arum, and haima, blood, from the red-spotted leaves of
some species)

Arisaema dracontium (L.) Schott, (Greek name for a kind of arum, presumably from draco,
dragon), GREEN-DRAGON, DRAGONROOT. Perennial from a corm; leaves net-veined, divided into
(5–)7–15 unequal leaflets (sometimes some of the divisions are not completely separated into
leaflets); summit of spathe with margins inrolled, tapering to a slender point; spadix long ex-
serted; fruits reddish orange. Low woods, moist slopes; Dallas, Cooke, Denton, Fannin, Grayson,
and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Late Apr–May. The
rust fungus Uromyces ari-triphylli (Schwein.) Seeler sometimes causes conspicuous lesions on
GREEN-DRAGON in nc TX (J. Hennen, pers. comm.). The tissues contain injurious calcium oxalate
raphides (Lampe & McCann 1985). 9 m/78

Arisaema triphyllum (L.) Schott, (three-leaved), (JACK-IN -THE-PULPIT, INDIAN -TURNIP ), with 3
                                                                             COLOCASIA /ARACEAE 1093

leaflets, the summit of the spathe arching over the spadix, not inrolled, and the spadix not ex-
serted, occurs in se and e TX to the e of nc TX. The tissues contain injurious calcium oxalate
raphides (Lampe & McCann 1985). 9

                          COLOCASIA TARO, ELEPHANT’S-EAR
AA tropical Asian genus of 8 species of tuberous herbs with peltate leaves; used as ornamen-
tals and for food. 9 All parts of Colocasia species, except the corm (when properly prepared) of
TARO, contain calcium oxalate crystals which cause burning and swelling of the mouth and
throat (Schmutz & Hamilton 1979). (Arabic: kolkas, originally used for the root of a species of
Nelumbo)
REFERENCES: Arridge & Fonteyn 1981; Wang 1983.

Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott, (edible), TARO, WILD TARO, KALO, DASHEEN, EDDO, COCOYAM. Large
perennial with large tuber-like corm and leaves all basal; easily identified by the large peltate
leaves; leaf blades ± ovate, notched at base but not as deep as attachment of petiole, the upper
surface often with a velvety sheen; spathe convolute, constricted between the inflated tube and
expanded blade, yellow; spadix terminated by a short or long appendage. Cultivated as an or-
namental and apparently spreading; Bell Co. (specimens collected in 1997 from a large popula-
tion along Salado Creek including a flowering individual), also Turtle Creek and White Rock
Lake (Dallas Co., R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); also known from Travis Co. just s of nc TX; its natural-
ization along the San Marcos River and neighboring areas of sc TX was discussed by Arridge
and Fonteyn (1981). Sep. Native of tropical Asia. Widely grown in the tropics for the edible
(when appropriately cooked) tuberous corm and young leaves; in Hawaii it is eaten in the form
of “poi.” However, all parts of the plant except the corms (when properly prepared) contain cal-
cium oxalate crystals and other toxins causing severe burning and swelling of the mouth and
throat and even death (Schmutz & Hamilton 1979). 9 I

            PISTIA WATER-LETTUCE, SHELLFLOWER, WATER-BONNET
AA monotypic genus; the leaf hairs produce a water-repellent surface; the leaves are nearly
horizontal during the day, but move to a more vertical position at night; the genus seems to evo-
lutionarily link the Araceae to the Lemnaceae. (Greek: pistos, water or liquid, referring to its
aquatic habitat)

Pistia stratiotes L., (soldier), WATER-LETTUCE, SHELLFLOWER, WATER-BONNET. Monoecious free-
floating herb; roots long, feathery, hanging; leaves clustered, entire, gray-green, velvety-hairy,
strongly ribbed lengthwise, cuneate to obovate-cuneate, to ca. 3–15 cm long, truncate to emar-
ginate at apex; spathes axillary, inconspicuous, ca. 15 mm long; staminate flowers above, pistil-
late below, solitary; perianth absent. Streams, lakes, and ponds; apparently spreading from cul-
tivation in creeks in Tarrant Co. (Fort Worth Botanic Garden); also cited for vegetational area 4
(Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly s TX and Edwards Plateau. Spring. This species can be-
come a serious pest in some regions by occupying areas of open water and in Texas is consid-
ered a “harmful or potentially harmful exotic plant”; it is illegal to release, import, sell, purchase,
propagate, or possess this species in Texas (Harvey 1998). Widespread in the tropics and sub-
tropics. Despite being called WATER-LETTUCE, this species contains oxalates and possibly other
toxins; intense irritation of the mouth, throat, and upper digestive tracts has been reported
from eating even small amounts (Morton 1982). 9

                                    XANTHOSOMA YAUTIA
AA tropical American genus of 57 species of herbs with milky sap and sagittate or hastate
leaf blades; a number are cultivated as ornamentals and for food. 9 Nearly all parts of a num-
1094 ARECACEAE/SABAL

ber of species are injurious due to the presence of calcium oxalate crystals and possibly a toxic
alkaloid; ingestion can cause burning, swelling, and blistering of the mouth, throat, and diges-
tive tract; fatalities have been reported; even tasting small amounts can cause serious reactions
(Morton 1982; Lampe & McCann 1985). (Greek: xanthos, yellow, and soma,body, alluding to the
yellow inner tissues of some species)
REFERENCE: Lemke & Schneider 1988.

Xanthosoma sagittifolium (L.) Schott, (arrow-leaved), ELEPHANT'S EAR, TANNIA, TANIA. Large pe-
rennial herb from a tuberous corm; aerial stems developing with age (in tropical areas); similar
to Colocasia but leaves not peltate; leaf blades to 90 cm long from attachment to petiole to tip
and ± as wide, with 8–9 pairs of main lateral veins; petioles longer than blades, to ca. 2 m long;
spathe convolute, constricted between the inflated tube and expanded blade. Apparently
spreading from cultivation; those in water surviving the winter; Bell Co. (Fort Hood–Sanchez
1997), also cited for vegetational read 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); also Edwards Plateau. Oct.
Native to West Indies. Grown there as an ornamental and in the tropics for its edible (after cook-
ing) corms and specially prepared young leaves; however, the sap is reported to be an irritant
and as with other Xanthosoma species, the plant should be considered toxic (Kingsbury 1964;
Morton 1982). 9 I


                  ARECACEAE (PALMAE) PALM FAMILY
AA large (2,650 species in 203 genera), mainly tropical, often conspicuous family of usually
unbranched, evergreen trees, shrubs, or lianas containing a number of economically important
plants including Calamus species (RATTAN), Cocos nuciferaL. (COCONUT PALM), Copernicia
prunifera (Mill.) H.E. Moore (CARNAUBA WAX PALM), Elaeis guineensis Jacq. (OIL PALM), Phoenix
dactylifera L. (DATE PALM), Phytelephas macrocarpa Ruíz & Pav. (VEGETABLE-IVORY OR TAGUA),
Roystonea regia (Kunth) O.R. Cook (ROYAL PALM), and Washingtonia filifera (L. Linden) H.
Wendl. (CALIFORNIA FAN PALM). The world's largest seeds (to 50 cm long) are produced by
Lodoicea maldivica (J.F. Gmel.) Pers. (SEYCHELLES PALM , DOUBLE-COCONUT, COCO -DE-MER). Be-
cause of the variety of species useful for food, fiber, and shelter, the PALM family is considered to
be the third most important family to humans, following only the GRASS and BEAN families. The
family is unusual in having an unbranched trunk with a single apical bud and a terminal ro-
sette of leaves. The woody stems are completely different in structure and manner of growth
(no permanent cambium or enlargement in diam.) from those of dicots. King’s-cabbage or
heart-of-palm is a food obtained from the apical bud (= apical meristem). Family name from
Areca, a genus of 60 species native from Indomalesia to tropical Australia and the Solomon Is-
lands. (Name derived from a vernacular name used in Malabar) (subclass Arecidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is a palm usually ca. 1 m tall and has
distinctive, large, evergreen, fan-like leaf blades divided into numerous segments; flowers very
small, numerous, in a panicle.
REFERENCES: Bailey 1961; Moore & Uhl 1982; Dahlgren et al. 1985; Tomlinson 1990; Lockett 1991;
Henderson et al. 1995; Zona 1997.

                                              SABAL
AA genus of 16 species of dwarf to stout, unarmed palms ranging from the se United States to
South America; some are used as a source of thatch. (Possibly derived from an American ver-
nacular name)
REFERENCES: Small 1922; Zona 1990.

Sabal minor (Jacq.) Pers., (smaller), DWARF PALMETTO, BUSH PALMETTO, DWARF PALM, BLUE PALM,
PALM , BLUE STEM, SWAMP PALM. Plant about 1 m tall (rarely taller), usually acaulescent with a
                                                                                   TILLANDSIA/BROMELIACEAE 1095

pithy crown or with a short trunk; leaves long-petioled, with stiff, evergreen, glabrous, fan-like
blades longitudinally pleated toward base, divided over half way (sometimes becoming split to
base) into many narrowly lanceolate segments; inflorescence a long panicle, its stalk with leafy
bracts consisting of closed, tubular basal sheath and grass-like short blade; flowers many,
subsessile, very small, with 3-lobed calyx and 3 greenish or brownish petals as long as the ca-
lyx; stamens 6; pistil 1; ovary superior; fruits black, 6–13 mm in diam. Stream bottoms; s and se
TX n along larger rivers to Dallas and Kaufman cos. in nc TX and Van Zandt and Wood cos. in
e TX, also spreading from cultivation in Tarrant Co. (Fort Worth Botanic Garden, R. O’Kennon,
pers. obs.). Jun.


       BROMELIACEAE PINEAPPLE OR BROMELIAD FAMILY
AA relatively large family (2,400 species in 59 genera) of epiphytic or terrestrial xerophytic
herbs; mainly limited to tropical to warm temperate areas of the New World. The most impor-
tant species economically is Ananas comosus(L.) Merr. (PINEAPPLE); many other species are cul-
tivated as ornamentals. A number of the epiphytic species are tank epiphytes; these have
tightly clasping leaf bases and are thus able to act as well-like “tanks” to store water which is
absorbed by specialized roots or hairs. These epiphytes form a “hanging ecosystem” in New
World tropical forests and provide habitats for an assortment of animals including frogs. In the
field, many species can be recognized by their tough, thickened, usually spiny leaves, often con-
spicuous inflorescences with colored bracts, and the typically epiphytic or xerophytic habit.
Family name from Bromelia, a tropical American genus of 48 species. (Named for Olaf Bromel,
1639–1705, Swedish botanist) (subclass Zingiberidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: gray or gray-green, xerophytic epiphytes; leaves with distinc-
tive peltate scales.
REFERENCES: Smith 1938; 1961; Smith & Wood 1975; Dahlgren et al. 1985.

                                         TILLANDSIA BALL-MOSS
Xerophytic epiphytes largely covered with gray scales or trichomes, the plants gray when dry,
gray-green when wet; leaves entire, with peltate scales that collect water and nutrients; flowers
perfect; stamens 6; ovary superior; fruit a septicidal capsule; seeds with a basal plumose
appendage.
AA tropical American genus of 380 species of epiphytes typically with leaves in a rosette;
some are cultivated as ornamentals. Because of their grayish color, seedlings are sometimes con-
fused with lichens (E. McWilliams, pers. comm.) (Named for Elias Tillands, 1640–1693, profes-
sor at Abo, who, as a student crossing directly from Stockholm, was so seasick that he returned
to Stockholm by walking more than 1,000 miles around the head of the Gulf of Bothnia and
hence assumed his surname (by land); the genus was erroneously supposed by Linnaeus to dis-
like water)
REFERENCES: Birge 1911; McWilliams 1992, 1995.

1. Plant typically a dense ball-like clump; stems short, 10 cm or less long, completely concealed by
   the overlapping leaf sheaths; flowers at the end of a scape (= flowering stalk) conspicuously
   exerted above the leaves                                                                                T. recurvata
1. Plant of slender, wiry, usually curled, elongate, hanging strands, not ball-like; stems elongate, of-
   ten several meters long, visible between the leaves; flowers sessile, among the leaves                  T. usneoides

Tillandsia recurvata (L.) L., (recurved), BALL-MOSS, BUNCH-MOSS, GALLITOS. Plant rarely > 15 cm
tall; roots present; leaves arising close together, curving out, elongate (3–17 cm long), very nar-
row (to ca. 2 mm wide), covered with scales; scape slender, with 1–2(–5) flowers; flowers bluish.
In nc TX, usually epiphytic on LIVE OAKS or further s and w, on rocks, tombstones, and utility
1096 BURMANNIACEAE/BURMANNIA

wires; Bell, Burnet, Milam, and Williamson cos. (McWilliams 1992); s and sc TX n to s part of nc
TX, apparently spreading e and ne (several populations are now known from LA—E.
McWilliams, pers. comm.); an introduced population on a single tree was observed in Dallas
(McWilliams 1992). Flowering throughout the year. This species has expanded its geographic
range in TX over the past 80 years, apparently in response to changing climate; such climate-
sensitive species may be able to serve as early indicatiors of projected regional climatic change
(McWilliams 1995).

Tillandsia usneoides (L.) L., (like Usnea, a lichen that hangs from trees) SPANISH-MOSS, OLD MAN’S-
BEARD, LONG-MOSS, BLACK-MOSS, PASTLE, FLORIDA-MOSS. Hanging strands to 3–4(–8) m long; roots
absent; leaves thread-like, 2–6 cm long; inflorescence of a single flower; flowers greenish or
greenish yellow. Epiphytic or on wires or other supports; native to se, e and c TX; known just to
the s of nc TX in Travis Co. (Smith 1961); included because of the possibility of occurrence on
extreme s or e margins of nc TX. Feb–Jun. In moist areas in se and e Texas this species hangs in
large extremely conspicuous festoons from trees. It occurs from the s U.S. s to Argentina, an in-
credible distribution stretching across 5,000 miles of latitude. Rarely flowering; distributed by
the wind and by birds using it as nest material; the dried plants are used as packing material
and in upholstery (Mabberley 1987).


                BURMANNIACEAE BURMANNIA FAMILY
AA small (160 species in 16 genera) mainly tropical family that occurs n to Japan and the e
U.S. and s to New Zealand; small forest herbs including many colorless saprophytic species
without chlorophyll. The family is closely related to the Orchidaceae. (subclass Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is a very small herb with a thread-like
unbranched stem, scale-like leaves, and a few small terminal flowers.
REFERENCES: Wood 1983a; Dahlgren et al. 1985.

                                          BURMANNIA
AA genus of 60 species of tropical and subtropical areas of the world. (Named for Johannes
Burmann, 1706–1779, a Dutch botanist)

Burmannia capitata (J.F. Gmel.) Mart., (headed), CAP BURMANNIA. Very small herb with a thread-
like, usually unbranched stem 5–20 cm tall; leaves alternate, tiny and scale-like, to 5 mm long,
few, widely spaced along the stem; flowers 1–several in a cluster at tip of stem, small, ca. 5 mm
long, 0.5–1.5 mm wide, greenish white or cream, sometimes tinged with blue, the six perianth
segments fused into a tube, tipped by minute to obsolescent lobes 0.5–1 mm long; stamens 3,
almost sessile, attached to the perianth tube; ovary inferior; capsules 2–5 mm long, 3-angled,
but not winged (winged in B. biflora L., known in TX only from deep e part). Moist woods, bogs;
Milam Co. near e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e TX. Aug–Nov.


                COMMELINACEAE SPIDERWORT FAMILY
Annual or perennial herbs; leaves alternate or basal, with closed, tubular basal sheaths and
broad or narrow, grass-like, entire blades; flowers in small cymose clusters subtended by re-
duced upper leaves or leafy bracts (if the bracts enclose the flowers they are referred to as
spathes); sepals 3; petals 3, thin and delicate, usually lasting half a day or less (flowers open dur-
ing morning, later in cloudy weather); stamens usually (5–)6, all fertile or some staminodial or
lacking; filaments often long-hairy; pistil 1; ovary superior; fruit a capsule.
AA medium-sized (650 species in 41 genera—R. Faden, pers. comm.) family of tropical, sub-
tropical, and warm temperate herbs; a number are widely used ornamentals including species
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1097




                                                                                                                  SPATHE
                                                                                LEAF



  Arisaema dracontium [SHI]             Colocasia esculenta [NIC]                           Pistia stratiotes [GWO]




       Xanthosoma sagittifolium [BA1]



                                                                               Sabal minor [BA1]

                                                                                                                      LEAF SCALE

  SINGLE STEM




                                                                                                                OPEN CAPSULE
                                                                                                                  W/SEEDS




                                                                                          SEED W/BASAL
                                                                                           APPENDAGE
                             WHOLE                                                          OF HAIRS
                             PLANT


Tillandsia recurvata [JAA]                                          Tillandsia usneoides [JAA]
1098 COMMELINACEAE/COMMELINA

of Tradescantia (SPIDERWORT), Rhoeo (BOATFLOWER, OYSTERPLANT), and Zebrina (WANDERING-
JEW); the latter 2 genera are now typically lumped into Tradescantia (Hunt 1986). (subclass
Commelinidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs with succulent mucilaginous stems with knotted
nodes and usually alternate, ± basally sheathing leaves with strongly parallel veins; petals 3 (1
sometimes smaller), delicate, often blue.
REFERENCES: Poole & Hunt 1980; Faden 1985, 1992; Hunt 1986; Tucker 1989; Faden & Hunt 1991.

1. Inflorescences each subtended or enclosed by a single leafy bract (the bract sometimes con-
   spicuously folded); the 3 petals not all alike, EITHER 2 larger and bluish and 1 one much smaller
   and white (at least paler than the others) OR one petal slightly smaller than the others; fertile
   stamens 3 (2–3 staminoidia also present) OR 6 and unequal.
   2. Bract (spathe) folded, the two sides ± parallel, 1.0–3.5 cm long, conspicuously different in
      shape from stem leaves; fertile stamens 3 (2–3 staminoidia also present); filaments glabrous;
      petals (upper 2) clawed; foliage not glaucous; widespread in nc TX                                Commelina
   2. Bract flat, not folded, 4–8 cm long, similar to upper stem leaves but shorter and wider; fertile
      stamens 6; filaments (5 of the 6) bearded; petals not clawed; foliage glaucous; in nc TX re-
      stricted to the Lampasas Cut Plain                                                                   Tinantia
1. Inflorescences each subtended by 2(–3) leaves with reduced sheaths but conspicuous long
   blades; the 3 petals all ± similar; fertile stamens 6, equal.                                       Tradescantia


                        COMMELINA WIDOW’S-TEARS, DAYFLOWER
Annuals or perennials; flowers bilaterally symmetrical; inflorescences enclosed in spathes; pet-
als greatly or slightly unequal, blue or blue and white, the upper 2 larger and clawed; stamens
unequal, 3 long (1 of these curved in), 3 slightly shorter, sterile (actually staminoidea).
AA genus of ca. 170 species of tropical and warm areas of the world; bees pierce the juicy lobes
of the upper 3 sterile anthers to obtain nectar. The common name DAYFLOWER comes from the
extremely delicate flowers which open in the morning but are gone by noon on sunny days
(Kirkpatrick 1992). (Named for the early Dutch botanists, Commelin, on account of the 2 showy
petals and 1 less conspicuous petal. Linnaeus was referring to the three botanists of that name,
two of whom, Johan, 1629–1692, and Kaspar, 1667–1731, were conspicuous botanists, while the
third “. . . died before accomplishing anything in Botany”)
REFERENCES: Pennell 1916, 1937, 1938; Brashier 1966; Faden 1989, 1993.

1. Leaf-like spathe enclosing flowers open not only on the top margin, but also open down the
   back margin to where it attaches to its stalk; annuals with fibrous roots.
   2. Two petals blue, 3rd (anterior) petal much smaller and white (or at least paler than the others);
      leaf blades 15–40 mm wide; leaf sheaths 10–20 mm long; bottom edge of spathes ± straight;
      stalk of spathes 1–7 cm long; spathes usually pale with contrasting dark green veins; capsules
      bilocular                                                                                           C. communis
   2. All 3 petals blue, 3rd slightly smaller; leaf blades 9–15(–22) mm wide; leaf sheaths 5–10 mm
      long; bottom edge of spathes usually curved down at tip; stalk of spathes 1–2 cm long; spathes
      without contrasting veins; capsules trilocular                                                        C. diffusa
1. Leaf-like spathe enclosing flowers open on the top margin, but with its edges fused together
   along the back margin; perennials with thickened roots.
   3. Two petals blue, the 3rd much smaller and white; stems usually not erect; spathes scattered
      along the stem (opposite leaves) and near the stem apex, usually 1 per node; leaf sheath
      margins inconspicuously ciliate with whitish hairs; leaves with auricles at summits of sheaths;
      leaf blades 14–35 mm wide                                                                              C. erecta
   3. All 3 petals blue, the lower one slightly smaller; stems usually strictly erect; spathes usually
                                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1099




                           OPEN FLOWER




             Burmannia capitata [CO 1]




                                                                     Commelina communis [DIL]


              Commelina diffusa [BR2]




Commelina erecta var. angustifolia [JON]   Commelina erecta var. erecta [DIL]            Commelina virginica [PLU]
1100 COMMELINACEAE/TITANTIA

     in clusters near the stem apex; leaf sheath margins conspicuously ciliate with reddish
     hairs; leaves without auricles; leaf blades 20–65 mm wide                                          C. virginica
                                                                                                                   a

Commelina communis L., (common), COMMON DAYFLOWER. Stems erect, later decumbent, to 4
mm in diam., to 50 cm tall. Stream banks and low thickets, can be a garden weed; Dallas Co.; e
TX, also Edwards Plateau. May–Oct. Native of e Asia. I

Commelina diffusa Burm. f., (diffuse, spreading), SPREADING DAYFLOWER, CREEPING DAYFLOWER.
Stems erect initially, later decumbent, usually not more than 1.5 mm in diam. Low woods;
Fannin (Talbot property) and Rockwall cos.; mainly se and e TX. Apr–Nov.

Commelina erecta L., (erect), ERECT DAYFLOWER, HIERBA DE POLLO. Stems erect to decumbent, 10–
70(–100+) cm long. Native in various soils, often a weed. May–Jun and Sep–Oct, occasionally
Jul–Aug. While often distinguishable, there is considerable variation (Brashier 1966) and over-
lap between the following varieties; Faden (1992) indicated the three freely intergrade and are
of questionable significance.

1. Blades of middle and upper leaves broadly oblong-lanceolate, less than 5 times as long as wide,
   1.4–3.2 cm wide                                                                                       var.. erecta
1. Blades of middle and upper leaves narrowly oblong-lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, more than 5
   times as long as wide, 0.5–1.2(–2.0) cm wide.
   2. Spathes (1.3–)1.5–2.0(–2.3) cm long                                                        var.. angustifolia
   2. Spathes (2.2)2.5–2.8(–3.3) cm long                                                            var. deamiana

var. angustifolia (Michx.) Fernald, (narrow-leaved), NARROW-LEAF DAYFLOWER. In habitats as di-
verse as sandy woods and rocky limestone slopes; throughout TX.

var. deamiana Fernald, (for Charles C. Deam, 1865–1953, American botanist). Usually in sandy
soils; Hill Co.; e TX w to nc TX.

var. erecta. Thickets, stream banks or a weedy invader elsewhere; se and e TX w to Rolling
Plains and Edwards Plateau. m/85

Commelina virginica L., (of Virginia), VIRGINIA DAYFLOWER. Plant spreading by elongate rhi-
zomes; stems coarse, 3–6 mm in diam. at base, erect (rarely decumbent), to 90 cm tall; leaf
blades scabrous when rubbed toward base. Low woods; Hopkins and Lamar cos.; se and e TX w
to e part of nc TX. May–Oct.

Commelina caroliniana Walter, (of Carolina), apparently native to India but scattered in the se
U.S., is known from Travis Co. just to the s of nc TX (Faden 1993); its presence in nc TX would
not be surprising. Faden (1993) separated it from the similar C. diffusaas follows: I

1. Spathes not at all to slightly falcate; upper cyme usually vestigial (rarely well-developed and 1-
   flowered); capsules (5–)6–8 mm long; ventral locule seeds 2.4–4.3(–4.6) mm long, smooth to
   faintly alveolate                                                                                    C. caroliniana
1. Spathes usually distinctly falcate; upper cyme in larger spathes usually well-developed and 1–
   several-flowered; capsules 4–6.3 mm long; ventral locule seeds 2–2.8(–3.2) mm long, deeply
   reticulate                                                                                               C. diffusa


                     TINANTIA FALSE DAYFLOWER, WIDOW’S-TEARS
AA genus of ca. 13 species (R. Faden, pers. comm.) from TX to the American tropics; some cul-
tivated as ornamentals; 2 of the species were previously treated as Commelinantia. (Named for
Francois A. Tinant, 1908–1858, a forester in Luxembourg—R. Faden, pers. comm.)
REFERENCES: Tharp 1922, 1956; Woodson 1942; Simpson et al. 1986.
                                                                             TRADESCANTIA/COMMELINACEAE 1101

Tinantia anomala (Torr.) C.B. Clarke, (anomalous), FALSE DAYFLOWER, WIDOW’S-TEARS . Tufted
glabrous annual with erect or spreading stems 20–80 cm long, becoming freely branched, the
branches emerging through the back of the leaf sheaths just above the nodes; basal leaves ta-
pered to a long petiole; upper stem leaves sessile or short petioled, the blades ± lanceolate, often
somewhat cordate and clasping basally; flowers in elongate cymes; petals not clawed, the 2 up-
per larger ones 15–18 mm long, lavender-blue, the much smaller lower 1 white; stamens 6, all
fertile, very polymorphic; upper 3 stamens, with filaments conspicuously bearded with yellow-
tipped hairs, with small anthers (2 lateral upper stamens upright, middle upper stamen less
upright); lower 3 stamens curved downward, with larger anthers; filaments of lateral 2 lower
stamens with purple hairs; filament of middle lower stamen glabrous; capsules 6–8 mm long.
Limestone gravel or rocky crevices, often in some shade; Edwards Plateau ne to McLennan and
s Bosque cos. (Mahler 1988), also Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); endemic to TX
or nearly so (1 record from Mexico—Faden 1992). Apr–Jun, rarely later. [Commelinantia
anomala (Torr.) Tharp] Simpson et al. (1986) gave detailed information on the reproductive biol-
ogy of this species; it is apparently largely autogamous. E m/107

                                    TRADESCANTIA SPIDERWORT
Perennial subsucculent herbs; leaf blades linear to oblong-elliptic; petals equal, not clawed, blue
to rose, magenta, purple, or white; stamens 6, all fertile and equal; filaments long-pilose with
colored hairs.
AAn American genus of 70 species; a number are cultivated as ornamentals including species
previously treated in Rhoeo (BOATFLOWER, OYSTERPLANT), and Zebrina (WANDERING-JEW). The
filaments of most species have long hairs and were used by Robert Brown in 1828 to observe
and describe protoplasmic streaming. Hybridization and introgression are well known in Tra-
descantia and complicate the taxonomy of the genus. The common name is possibly derived
from the long slender leaves which clasp the stem and dangle like spider legs or from the muci-
laginous sap stringing out to resemble a spider’s web, and wort, from Anglo-Saxon: wyrt, a plant
or herb (Tveten & Tveten 1993). (Named for John Tradescant, 1608–1662, gardener to King
Charles I of England)
REFERENCES: Bush 1904; Tharp 1932; Anderson & Woodson 1935; Anderson & Sax 1936; Ander-
son 1954; MacRoberts 1977, 1980; Hunt 1980.

1. Leaf blades broader than their opened flattened sheaths, at least the upper ones                     T. edwardsiana
1. Leaf blades narrower than sheaths or ca. as broad as their opened flattened sheaths.
   2. Upper internodes glabrous.
      3. Sepals glabrous or with only a small tuft of hairs at tips (this is the only nc TX species like
         this; all others have pubescent sepals)                                                              T. ohiensis
      3. Sepals sparsely to densely pubescent on back (hairs either eglandular or glandular).
         4. Sepals either completely eglandular-pubescent or with eglandular and glandular
            pubescence intermixed; bracts pilose to glabrous                                              T. hirsutiflora
                                                                                                                        a
         4. Sepals usually with glandular pubescence only (sometimes with a tuft of eglandular hairs
            at tip); bracts glabrous                                                                     T. occidentalis
   2. Upper internodes variously pubescent (puberulent, pilose, or with matted hairs).
      5. Hairs on internodes minute or long and ± straight, wide-spreading.
         6. Sepals with only eglandular pubescence (use lens).
            7. Leaf sheaths glabrous or minutely pubescent; bracts conspicuously saccate, the blade
                reduced, densely and minutely velutinous                                                     T. gigantea
            7. Leaf sheaths long pilose or with long matted or tangled hairs; bracts not conspicu-
                ously saccate, the blades well-developed, glabrous to ± pilose.
1102 COMMELINACEAE/TRADESCANTIA

             8. Stems 12–49 cm tall, with 2–5 nodes; leaf blades usually edged with purple; sepals
                relatively firm, dull-green to suffused or edged with rose                             T. hirsutifloraa
             8. Stems 2–7 cm tall in flower, up to 30 cm in fruit, usually with 1–2 nodes; leaf blades
                usually edged with pink or purple; sepals somewhat petal-like, usually strikingly
                purple or rose-colored, occasionally pale green                                               T. tharpii
       6. Sepals with glandular pubescence and often also eglandular pubescence (use lens).
          9. Leaf sheaths long pilose, at least toward their summits                                   T. hirsutifloraa
          9. Leaf sheaths glabrous or short pubescent.
             10. Petals ovate, bright blue, occasionally pink; plants 10–30(–45) cm tall; blades of
                 leaves and bracts up to 20 cm long; bracts not conspicuously saccate                       T. humilis
             10. Petals obovate, magenta-pink to blue; plants 20–75 cm tall; blades of leaves and
                 bracts 10–35 cm long; bracts conspicuously saccate                                        T. gigantea
    5. Hairs on internodes long and matted or tangled, spider-web-like in appearance, ± appressed.
       11. Stems erect or ascending, simple or infrequently branched, 30–105 cm tall; roots con-
           spicuously felty with red-brown hairs easily visible to the naked eye                       T. reverchonii
       11. Stems spreading and ± diffuse, much branched, 10–35 cm long; roots not conspicu-
            ously felty to the naked eye                                                                T. subacaulis

Tradescantia edwardsiana Tharp, (of Edwards Plateau), PLATEAU SPIDERWORT. Stems erect or as-
cending, puberulent to glabrate, 25–70 cm tall; leaf blades elliptic-lanceolate, 7–30 cm long, 15–
65 mm wide, gradually constricted to the sheath, acuminate, minutely puberulent to essen-
tially glabrate; leaf sheaths 7–20 mm wide, nearly glabrous except for the ciliate margins;
pedicels minutely and densely puberulent, the hairs sometimes glandular when flowers are in
bud stage; sepals glandular-puberulent, sometimes also with eglandular pubescence; petals
white to pale blue or lavender, rarely bright pink, broadly ovate. Rich woods, moist alluvial ter-
races, and ravines; Bell, Collin, Coryell, Dallas, Fannin, and Palo Pinto cos., also Brown and
Hamilton cos. (Stanford 1971); Anderson and Woodson (1935) also mapped a collection from
just s of the Red River in what is apparently Cooke Co.; also Travis Co. just s of nc TX (Anderson
& Woodson 1935); endemic to Edwards Plateau and nc TX. Feb–May. E

Tradescantia gigantea Rose, (gigantic), GIANT SPIDERWORT. Stems erect or ascending, branching
infrequently, glabrous below, minutely pubescent above; leaf blades glabrous or the upper mi-
nutely pubescent; sepals with only eglandular pubescence; petals magenta-pink to blue. Lime-
stone soils; e Edwards Plateau n to Bell Co. on s margin of nc TX, also Burnet Co. (Anderson &
Woodson 1935); endemic to TX. Mar–May. E

Tradescantia hirsutiflora Bush, (hairy-flowered), HAIRY-FLOWER SPIDERWORT. Stems ± spreading
pilose to hirsute or glabrate; sepals with only eglandular pubescence or with both glandular
and eglandular; petals bright blue to purplish, rarely pink. Sandy soils; Grayson and Lamar cos.
in Red River drainage, also Milam and Henderson cos. on e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e
TX, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun.

Tradescantia humilis Rose, (low-growing, dwarf), TEXAS SPIDERWORT. Plant 10–30(–45) cm tall,
minutely pubescent or slightly pilose, or largely glabrous; petals bright blue, occasionally pink.
Sandy or rocky ground; Bell, Brown, and Williamson cos., also Dallas and Lamar cos. (Anderson
& Woodson 1935); mainly sc to nc TX; endemic to TX. Mar–Jun. E

Tradescantia occidentalis (Britton) Smyth, (western), PRAIRIE SPIDERWORT. Similar to T. ohiensis;
10–90 cm tall; leaf blades averaging narrower (to 20 mm wide); petals bright blue to rose or
magenta. Sandy, gravelly, or less often clayey soils, prairies; widespread in w half of nc TX, also
Navarro Co. on e margin of nc TX, Anderson and Woodson (1935) also reported Dallas,
Kaufman, and McLennan cos. in e part of nc TX; widespread in TX, mainly Blackland Prairie s
and w to w TX. Apr–Jun.
                                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1103




FILAMENT VARIABILITY
 WITHIN ONE FLOWER




                                                                                  Tradescantia edwardsiana [RHO]




                  Tinantia anomala [HEA, TOR]




                                                Tradescantia hirsutiflora [HEA]




              Tradescantia gigantea [HEA]                                           Tradescantia humilis [HEA]
1104 CYPERACEAE

Tradescantia ohiensis Raf., (of Ohio), OHIO SPIDERWORT. Plant 20–75 cm tall, glabrous and glau-
cous; leaf blades 3–32(–45) mm wide; petals blue to rose, magenta, or rarely white. Sandy or
clayey soils, prairies, meadows, thickets and roadsides; e 1/2 of TX. [T. canaliculata Raf.] This is
the most common spiderwort in nc TX. According to Faden (1992), it is the most common and
widespread species in the U.S.; it hybridizes with a number of other species. Mar–Jun. The roots
are reported to contain a poisonous saponin (Ajilvsgi 1984). 9 m/108

Tradescantia reverchonii Bush, (for Julien Reverchon, 1837–1905, a French-American immigrant
to Dallas and important botanical collector of early TX), REVERCHON’S SPIDERWORT, GRASS-VIO-
LET. Stems erect or ascending, simple or infrequently branched, 30–105 cm tall, usually rather
densely pilose with somewhat matted or tangled hairs; sepals with eglandular or both
eglandular and glandular hairs; petals bright blue (rarely rose or white). Sandy soils, open
woods; Falls and Williamson cos., also collected at Dallas by Reverchon (Mahler 1988), but not
found there since, also Henderson Co. (Anderson & Woodson 1935); mainly e TX. Mar–Jul.

Tradescantia subacaulis Bush, (almost without a stem), STEMLESS SPIDERWORT. Stems spreading,
10–35 cm long, densely matted-pilose throughout; roots tuberous-thickened; sepals with glan-
dular and eglandular hairs; petals usually bright blue, occasionally pink. Loose sandy soils,
open woods, or open ground; Limestone Co., also Navarro Co. (Anderson & Woodson 1935); s
TX n to se part of nc TX; endemic to TX. Late Mar–Jun. E

Tradescantia tharpii E.S. Anderson & Woodson, (for Benjamin Carroll Tharp, 1885–1964, bota-
nist at Univ. of TX), THARP ’S SPIDERWORT. Plant long-pilose throughout, usually densely so;
stems rarely branching, often initially acaulescent; sepals with only eglandular pubscence;
petals deep rose or purple, sometimes blue. Sandy clay or rarely silty clay soils, rocky prairies,
open woods, or open ground; Collin, Denton, Dallas, Tarrant, and Wise cos., also Erath Co.
(Anderson & Woodson 1935); Blackland Prairie w to e Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Late
Mar–Apr.


                          CYPERACEAE SEDGE FAMILY
Annual or perennial herbs; culms (= stems) triangular (most commonly), flat, round, square, or
multi-angular, with smooth nodes and usually pithy or spongy internodes; leaves with tubular
basal sheath (often reduced or absent from upper leaves) closed except at summit (but apt to
become split by growth of culm), generally without a scaly ring (ligule) at junction of sheath
and blade on upper (inner) side, and with terminal, usually elongate blade (leaves all reduced to
inconspicuous sheaths in Eleocharis and some Cyperus and Scirpus); inflorescences various
(umbellate in Cyperus and Fimbristylis and less distinctly so in some other genera); flowers
(often referred to as florets) perfect or unisexual, each subtended by a single (rarely 2) scale-like
bract (often referred to as floral scales or in this treatment scales of spikelets or simply scales),
without perianth or perianth reduced to bristles or small perianth scales, solitary or in spikelets
(these often with added empty scale-like bracts at base); stamens 1–3, with anther attached by
one end; pistil 1; fruit an achene.
AA large, cosmopolitan (especially temperate), taxonomically difficult family of herbs with
4,500–5,000 species in 100–105 genera (Goetghebeur 1987). Because of the often similar vegeta-
tive parts and reduced reproductive structures, technical characters requiring at least a hand
lens frequently have to be used to distinguish species. Cyperaceae species superficially re-
semble grasses or rushes; the family is of limited economic importance as wildlife food, for
woodland grazing, or for erosion control; in n temperate parts of the world they sometimes re-
place grasses as forage; in TX in the Hill Country and w part of the state, Carex emoryi L. be-
comes important for livestock during summer months; also some are problematic weeds (S.D.
                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1105




Tradescantia occidentalis [BB2]




                       Tradescantia ohiensis [ BB2]
                                                             Tradescantia reverchonii [HEA]




                           Tradescantia subacaulis [ HEA]                     Tradescantia tharpii [AND]
1106 CYPERACEAE

Jones, pers. comm.). The monotypic North American genus Dulichium (D. arundinaceum (L.)
Britton (genus: derivation not given by original author; sp.: reed-like)—THREE-WAY SEDGE) oc-
curs in e TX just to the e of nc TX. It resembles Cyperus in having 2-ranked spikelets, but differs
in having 6–9 perianth bristles subtending the achene (none in Cyperus) and the inflores-
cences being axillary (terminal in Cyperus). The Cyperaceae, with 140 species, is the fourth
largest family in the nc TX flora (after Asteraceae, Poaceae, and Fabaceae). (subclass
Commelinidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: grass-like or rush-like herbs with solid internodes, round or
often 3-angled culms (“sedges have edges”), and often 3-ranked leaves without ligules; many
(but not all) species grow in wet habitats; flowers small, inconspicuous, without perianth or
perianth reduced to bristles or perianth small scales, enclosed by a sac-like perigynium OR
subtended by 1 scale-like bract each, and arranged in very reduced spikes/spikelets. The ± simi-
lar Poaceae (GRASSES) have hollow internodes, round culms, 2-ranked leaves usually with a
ligule, and flowers subtended by 2 scale-like bracts each (lemma and palea); the ± similar
Juncaceae (RUSHES) have flowers with a small 6-parted perianth.
REFERENCES: Dahlgren et al. 1985; Goetghebeur 1987; Tucker 1987; Bruhl et al. 1992; Bruhl 1995;
Rolfsmeier 1995.

1. Pistil (and later achene) enclosed in a pouch or sac (= perigynium) from which the style is ex-
   serted during flowering; flowers imperfect                                                                      Carexx
1. Pistil (and later achene) not enclosed in a perigynium (but subtended by flat or concave scales);
   flowers perfect.
   2. Scales of spikelets (= scale-like bracts also referred to as floral scales or simply scales) 2-ranked
      (= in two distinct rows), the spikelets ± flattened or square.
      3. Culms (= stems) with leaf blades or leafy bracts at least below the inflorescence; spike-
          lets 1–many-flowered; inflorescences often conspicuously branched, of few–many
          spikelets; achenes without a tubercle; extremely abundant in nc TX.
          4. Plants small (culms 21(–38) cm or less tall); inflorescence a single unlobed or 3-lobed
             (but unbranched) terminal structure; spikelets with only 2 scales (also 2 minute, brownish,
             basal scales) and only 1 bisexual fertile flower; each spikelet with only 1 achene; achenes
             lenticular (= lens-shaped); styles 2-branched                                                       Kyllinga
          4. Plants variable in size, but often much larger; inflorescence often obviously branched;
             spikelets with 4–many scales and 3–many bisexual flowers; each spikelet with > 1
             achene; achenes usually trigonous (= 3-sided) OR in a few species lenticular; styles usu-
             ally 3 branched OR in a few species 2-branched                                                      Cyperus
      3. Culms without any leaf blades or leafy bracts (leaves reduced to basal sheaths); spikelets 1–
          3-flowered; inflorescences without any branching whatsoever, of a solitary terminal spike-
          let; achenes with a tubercle (= persistent style base differing in appearance from body of
          achene); in nc TX only 1 rare species (E. baldwinii) has the scales of spikelets 2-ranked            Eleocharis
   2. Scales of spikelets spirally arranged, not 2-ranked, the spikelets round.
      5. Scales of spikelets white; spikelets in a terminal, leafy-bracted head, the bracts with white
          base; style branches 2                                                                            Rhynchosporaa
      5. Scales of spikelets variously colored (may rarely be partly white); inflorescences various, but
          not with white-based bracts; style branches 2 or 3.
          6. Inflorescences with a single spikelet, this terminal at end of culm, the inflorescences thus
             without any branching whatsoever; culms without leaf blades or leafy bracts; achenes
             with a tubercle (= persistent style base at apex of achene differing in appearance from
             body of achene)                                                                                   Eleocharis
          6. Inflorescences with 1–many spikelets, these terminal or lateral, the inflorescences
             thus unbranched OR often conspicuously branched; culms with leaf blades (at least basal
             ones) or leafy bracts; achenes with or without a tubercle.
                                                                                        CYPERACEAE 1107

7. Achenes with whitish or light grayish, bony or crustaceous, outer layer (pericarp),
   usually sitting on a distinct hardened ring-like or disk-like pad                                    Scleria
7. Achenes with neither whitish, light grayish, bony, nor crustaceous, outer layer (peri-
   carp), nor sitting on a distinct, hardened, ring-like or disk-like pad.
   8. Achenes with prominent tubercle; spikelets 1–few-flowered, the florets with
      0–1(–2) pistils (uppermost 1–2 florets without pistil); lower (1–)2–3 scales of
      spikelets sterile                                                                           Rhyncospora a
   8. Achenes without tubercle (except in Bulbostylis, which has thread-like leaves);
      spikelets 1–many-flowered, all florets with pistil; only lowest scale of spiklet sterile
      (except in Cladium which usually has more than 1 sterile lower scale).
      9. Scales of spikelets with prominent bristle-tip longer than width of scale
         base; perianth of 3 stalked perianth scales, these sometimes alternating with 3
         bristles                                                                                      Fuirena
      9. Scales of spikelets with short bristle-tip or bristle-tip absent; perianth of 1 thin
         perianth scale, or of bristles, or periarth absent.
         10. “Spikelets” (actually small spikelet-like spikes or heads of spirally arranged
              single-flowered spikelets) 1–5(–8) mm long, sessile; inside each scale a single,
              thin, inconspicuous perianth-like bracteole; plants very small, to only 15 cm
              tall; scales with 2 or 3 prominent ribs (use strong lens)                            Lipocarpha
         10. Spikelets 2.5–20 mm long, sessile or on distinct pedicels; inside each scale a
              perianth of bristles or perianth absent; plants small to very large; scales with
              only 1 prominent rib (the midrib).
              11. Spikelets with a single fertile (= achene-producing) floret subtended by
                   2–3 empty scales (these lacking achenes but can have stamens); leaf mar-
                   gins scaberulous (= only slightly roughened, almost smooth to the touch)
                   to dangerously spinulose-serrulate (= saw-toothed); inflorescences with
                   numerous spikelets, these in groups of 2–10 at the ends of short branches
                   (= peduncles); perianth absent; rare, known in nc TX only from Dallas and
                   Henderson cos.                                                                     Cladium
              11. Spikelets not as above, with 1–many fertile florets, these subtended by
                   only 1 empty scale; leaf margins various; inflorescences not as above; peri-
                   anth absent or of bristles; common and widespread in nc TX.
                   12. Inflorescences usually either 1-sided or widely spreading or droop-
                       ing; perianth of bristles (except in 1 small annual species); plants small
                       to very large (to 5 m tall) (segregates of Scirpus in the broad sense).
                       13. Inflorescences with a single, erect modified leaf (involucral bract)
                            appearing like a continuation of the culm, the inflorescences thus
                            appearing lateral; culms with 1–3 leaves near base OR without
                            blade-bearing leaves.
                            14. Spikelets 2–10 mm long; plants tufted annuals 2–22(–30) cm
                                tall; culms wiry, < 1.5 mm thick near base; achenes minutely
                                papillose (this can sometimes be obscured by a whitish wax-
                                like layer); perianth bristles absent; inflorescences with 1–3
                                spikelets                                                              Isolepis
                            14. Spikelets 5–20 mm long; plants rhizomatous perennials 30–
                                500 cm tall OR tufted annuals or perennials 9–65 cm tall (in
                                the rare S. saximontanus known in nc TX only from the
                                Lampasas Cut Plain); culms coarse, 2–20 mm thick near base
                                OR 0.5–1.5 mm thick (in S. saximontanus); achenes either
                                smooth OR (in S. saximontanus) with prominent, transverse,
1108 CYPERACEAE/BOLBOSCHOENUS

                                  wavy ridges; perianth bristles present OR absent (in S.
                                  saximontanus); inflorescences with 1–150 spikelets            Schoenoplectus
                         13. Inflorescences with 2 or more well-developed leaf-like involucral
                              bracts, the inflorescences thus appearing terminal; culms with
                              well-developed leaves.
                              15. Spikelets small, 3–10 mm long, 2–4 mm wide, very numer-
                                  ous; achenes < 1.5 mm long; culms mostly obscurely trian-
                                  gular                                                                  Scirpus
                              15. Spikelets larger, 10–30(–40) mm long, 6–12 mm wide, few in
                                  number; achenes 3–4 mm long; culms sharply triangular
                                                                                                 Bolboschoenus
                     12. Inflorescences neither distinctly 1-sided, widely spreading, nor droop-
                         ing; perianth absent; plants 1 m or less tall, often much less.
                         16. Leaf blades flat, some or all over 0.8 mm wide; inflorescences with
                              2 or more leafy bracts; achenes without tubercle.
                              17. Spikelets 1-flowered (with only 2 scales per spikelet), sessile
                                  in head-like clusters closely subtended by bracts much longer
                                  than the heads; style base neither dilated nor fimbriate              Kyllinga
                              17. Spikelets several–many-flowered (scales numerous), on dis-
                                  tinct pedicels or if clustered then spikelets conspicuously
                                  many-scaled; style base dilated, fimbriate                        Fimbristylis
                         16. Leaf blades thread-like, 0.1–0.6 mm wide; inflorescences with 1
                              prominent bract; achenes with tubercle                                 Bulbostylis


                               BOLBOSCHOENUS BULRUSH
AA genus of 6–13 species (Smith 1997a) known from Mesoamerica n to the United States,
Eurasia, and Australia. Four species are native to North America n of Mexico, with 1 natural-
ized. Two species are known in TX with a third suspected (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.). Previously
included in Scirpus (e.g., Kartesz 1994) and according to some, better treated as a section or sub-
genus in Scirpus in the broad sense; Strong (1993, 1994) argued that Scirpus is heterogenous but
lumped Bolboschoenuswith Schoenoplectus. We are following Smith (1995, 1997a) and Jones et
al. (1997) in recognizing this segregate of Scirpus at the generic level. Smith (1995) indicated
that Bolboschoenusand a number of other segregates of Scirpus will be recognized in the forth-
coming Cyperaceae treatment for Flora of North America (Vol. 11). This approach is supported
by the phylogenetic studies of Bruhl (1995) which suggested that Scirpus sensu lato is poly-
phyletic. (Greek: bulbus, bulb, and schoeno, reed or rush-like)
REFERENCES: Beetle 1942, 1947; Koyama 1962; Strong 1993, 1994; Browning et al. 1995; Smith
1995, 1997a; Smith & Yatskievych 1996.

Bolboschoenus maritimus (L.) Palla, (of the sea), ALKALI BULRUSH, BAYONET-GRASS, PRAIRIE BUL-
RUSH, KOYAMA, SALTMARSH BULRUSH. Perennial 40–150 cm tall, with rhizomes 1–4 mm thick and
corms to 20 mm thick; culms sharply triangular, 5–20 mm thick at base; leaves several, well-
developed; inflorescences appearing terminal, subtended by several bracts; spikelets 10–30(–
40) mm long, 6–12 mm wide, usually few in number (1–)2–15(–40), either all sessile or some
sessile and some peduncled; scales of spikelets with midnerve prolonged into a 1–3 mm long
point; styles 2(–3) branched; achenes 3–4 mm long, biconvex or nearly so. Wet ground; Grayson
Co. (Hagerman National Wildlife Refuge); nc TX w to w TX. Jul–Aug. [B. paludosus (A. Nelson)
Soó, B. maritimus subsp. paludosus (A. Nelson) T. Koyama, Scirpus maritimus L., Scirpus
maritimus L. var. paludosus (A. Nelson) Kük.] If infraspecific taxa are recognized, all TX mate-
                                                                                   BULBOSTYLIS/CYPERACEAE 1109

rial would be subsp. paludosus (Smith 1997a). The corms were used as food by Native Ameri-
cans in w North America (Beetle 1950).

                                                BULBOSTYLIS
Ours tufted annuals or short-lived perennials with fibrous roots; leaves basal, filiform or seta-
ceous; inflorescence a small, simple or compound, umbel-like cyme at end of flowering culm;
spikelets several-flowered; scales of spikelets spirally imbricate, keeled; bristles absent; achenes
trigonous-obovoid, ca. 1 mm long; style base persistent as a minute tubercle.
AA genus of 100 species of tropical and warm areas; previously included in Fimbristylis.
(Greek: bolbos, swelling or bulb, and stylos, pillar, column, or style)
REFERENCES: Kral 1971; Jones & Wipff 1992.

1. Umbel-like cymes simple; scales of spikelets truncate at apex, usually notched, the tip of the keel
   barely reaching base of notch; achenes finely transversely ridged                                       B. capillaris
1. Umbel-like cymes sometimes compound (the cyme branches themselves bearing small cymes);
   scales of spikelets broadly obtuse at apex, the tip of the keel reaching the apex of the scale or
   slightly exceeding it; achenes with an easily lost, waxy, fine pebbling                               B. ciliatifolia

Bulbostylis capillaris (L.) Kunth ex C.B. Clarke, (hair-like), HAIR-SEDGE. Slender annual 5–35 cm
tall; spikelets narrowly ovoid; 3–5 mm long, rarely longer. In loose sand; included based on cita-
tion of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); e 1/2 of TX and Trans-Pecos.
Jun–Sep.

Bulbostylis ciliatifolia (Elliott) Fernald, (ciliate-leaved). Annual or short-lived perennial to 40
cm tall; spikelets narrowly ovoid to lance-ovoid or oblong, 2–6 mm long. Sandy areas. Summer–
Fall. Kral (1971) separated 2 varieties as follows:

1. Low annuals; inflorescence a simple to rarely compound umbel of few, lance-ovoid spikelets;
   longest bract of inflorescence seldom exceeding inflorescence; edges of leaves usually hispidulous
                                                                                                         var. ciliatifolia
1. Tall perennials; inflorescence usually of many, oblong or lance-linear spikelets and commonly
   compound; longest bract of inflorescence commonly longer than inflorescence; edges of leaves
   usually distinctly tuberculate-scabrid                                                                var. coarctata

var. ciliatifolia. Parker Co.; e TX w to nc TX.

var. coarctata (Elliott) Kral, (crowded together). Dallas, Milam, and Parker cos.; se and e TX w to
nc TX.

                                           CAREX CARIC SEDGE
                                 Prepared by Stanley D. Jones (BRCH)
Cespitose or rhizomatous grass-like perennial herbs; plants mostly monoecious (all TX taxa),
rarely dioecious; culms (= stems) triangular or terete, mostly solid; leaves 3-ranked; sheaths
closed; inflorescences of spikes, either unisexual or bisexual, when bisexual they are androgy-
nous (= having the staminate flowers distal to the pistillate), or gynecandrous (= having the pis-
tillate flowers distal to the staminate), when unisexual the staminate spike is terminal with lat-
eral spikes being pistillate or some androgynous; flowers enclosed by a sac-like scale (=
perigynium) with an apical orifice from which the style or stigmas protrude; each perigynium
subtended by a single pistillate scale; perianth absent; stamens (2–)3; carpels 2 or 3; stigmas 2 or
3; ovary and ovule 1; fruit an achene, lenticular and distigmatic or trigonous and tristigmatic.
1110 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

AA huge genus of ca. 2,000 species, cosmopolitan in distribution, mostly in n temperate and
arctic regions of moist to wet habitats. It is the largest genus in the Texas flora with ca. 95 taxa
plus 3 introduced species used as cultivars that may persist; similarily it is the largest genus in
the Oklahoma flora (Taylor & Taylor 1994). Carex is also the largest genus in the flora of nc TX,
being represented by 55 species. Forage value for livestock is low but the plants can be of use for
wildlife, especially rabbits, rodents, deer, and birds. The genus is also important in preventing
soil erosion. (The classical Latin name, of obscure origin; derived by some from the Greek:
keirein , to cut, on account of the sharp leaves—as indicated in the English name SHEAR-GRASS)

This key is based on mature perigynia and fruit; fruiting material is essential for proper identi-
fication. Incomplete veins refer to veins that do not extend the entire length of the perigynium
body. County citations for Carex are from a number of herbaria including BRCH.
REFERENCES: Mackenzie 1931–35, 1940; Hermann 1954a, 1970; Bryson 1980; Reznicek & Ball
1980; Menapace et al. 1986; Ball 1990; Bernard 1990; Crins 1990; Manhart 1990; Reznicek 1990;
Standley 1990; Jones & Hatch 1990; Naczi & Bryson 1990; Jones & Reznicek 1991; Rothrock
1991; Naczi 1992; Reznicek & Naczi 1993; Jones 1994a, 1994b.

1. Achenes 2-sided, plano-convex or unequally biconvex in cross-section, flattened; stigmas 2.
   2. Inflorescence 2–5 cm wide, usually an open panicle of spicate branches; perigynia 6–7 mm
      long with broad subtruncate, spongy-thickened bases; perigynial wall frequently adhering to
      the achene; achenes ovate-lanceolate; ventral leaf sheath margins with orange-red dots                  C. crus-corvi
   2. Inflorescence < 1.5 cm wide, a contracted panicle of spicate branches, spicate raceme, or com-
      posed of individual lateral or terminal spikes, but not an open panicle; perigynia without broad
      subtruncate, spongy-thickened bases OR if so then not 6–7 mm long; perigynial wall little to
      not at all adhering to the achene; achenes variously shaped but not ovate-lanceolate; ventral
      leaf sheath margins without orange-red dots, OR if dots present, then not in conjunction with
      the other characters.
      3. Terminal spike solely staminate, or sometimes partly pistillate in C. crinita.
         4. Lateral spikes, at least the lower, sessile or nearly so, ascending                                   C. emoryi
         4. Lateral spikes on flexuous peduncles, drooping                                      C. crinita var. brevicrinus
      3. Terminal spike either androgynous or gynecandrous.
         5. Terminal or all spikes androgynous, the staminate flowers often fugacious (= falling or
            disappearing early) making spikes appear solely pistillate, the spikes variously shaped,
            but not appearing clavate.
            6. Primary spicate branches usually less than 10, most frequently a primary branch will
               be comprised of a single spike, sometimes it will rebranch giving rise to secondary spikes.
               7. Leaf sheaths baggy (loose) around the culm                                                     C. gravida
               7. Leaf sheaths tight (not loose) around the culm.
                  8. Lowest inflorescence bract 5.5–25 cm long, greatly exceeding the inflorescence,
                     two to many times as long as the inflorescence.
                     9. Culms smooth below inflorescence; plants of open bottomlands or floodplain
                        habitats                                                                              C. arkansana
                     9. Culms antrorsely scaberulous below inflorescence; plants of open mesic to sub-
                        mesic woodlands                                                                      C. perdentata
                  8. Lowest inflorescence bract less than 5.5 cm long, not exceeding the inflorescence,
                     or less than two times as long as the inflorescence.
                     10. Beaks of perigynia smooth, not serrated.
                         11. Perigynia ovate-deltoid, veinless ventrally, spongy at base but without a
                              swollen spongy area at base on ventral surface                             C. leavenworthii
                         11. Perigynia ovate-lanceoid, with veins present on ventral surface, at least
                              proximally over an enlarged spongy area at base.
                                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1111




Bolboschoenus maritimus [CO 1]                          Bulbostylis capillaris [SID]            Bulbostylis ciliatifolia var. ciliatifolia [SID]




        Bulbostylis ciliatifolia var. coarctata [SID]                              Carex abscondita [MAC]




               Carex albicans var. australis [MAC ]                                              Carex albolutescens [BB2]
1112 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

                     12. Perigynia 1.3–1.8 mm wide; widest leaf blade 1.5–3 mm wide
                                                                                                         C. retroflexa
                     12. Perigynia 1–1.3 mm wide; widest leaf blade 1–1.5 mm wide                          C. texensis
             10. Beaks of perigynia serrated, not smooth.
                 13. Perigynia spongy at base, with or without a swollen area basely.
                     14. Perigynia (1.4–)1.5–2.7(–2.8) mm wide, ovate-deltoid or conspicuously
                         ovate, without a swollen spongy area at base on ventral surface.
                         15. Perigynia 2.2–3.2(–3.3) mm long, veinless ventrally, with 0(–3) veins
                             dorsally                                                              C. leavenworthii
                         15. Perigynia (3.3–)3.4–5.2(–5.6) mm long, with 0–5(–8) narrow veins
                             (ca. 0.1–0.2 mm wide) ventrally, with 0–10(–11) narrow veins
                             dorsally                                                                  C. perdentata
                     14. Perigynia 0.9–1.8 mm wide, ovate-lanceoid or slightly ovate-oblong,
                         with a swollen spongy area at base of ventral surface                              C. socialis
                 13. Perigynia not spongy at base.
                     16. Adaxial and abaxial leaf surfaces smooth, not minutely papillose (not
                         sandpaper-like), except sometimes sparingly so along major veins.
                         17. Perigynia (3.4–)3.5–4.7 mm long, (2–)2.1–2.7(–3.1) mm wide.
                             18. Apex of the ventral leaf sheath straight or slightly concave, not
                                callused or only slightly thickened, friable, frequently with scat-
                                tered reddish dots; dorsal leaf sheath white or pale green with
                                darker green veins with darker green septate-nodules, but not
                                green mottled with white; widest leaves (3–)4–8 mm wide; most
                                culms forming greater than 70˚ angle with the ground                       C. gravida
                             18. Apex of ventral leaf sheath concave, callused, not friable, with-
                                out scattered reddish dots; all dorsal leaf sheaths green OR green
                                with darker green septate-nodule, OR some sheaths green
                                mottled with white; widest leaves 2.5–4.5 mm wide; most culms
                                forming less than a 50˚ angle with the ground, usually much
                                less                                                                       C. austrina
                         17. Perigynia 2–3.5 mm long, 1.3–2.3(–2.4) mm wide.
                             19. Perigynia bodies ovate-deltoid; perigynia beaks 0.3–0.7(–0.8)
                                   mm long with a single row of serrations, abruptly arising from
                                   the apex of the perigynium; widest leaf blade 1.1–3(–4) mm
                                   wide; leaves per fertile culm 2–6(–7); culm width, ca. 2 cm above
                                   rootstock, 1–2.4(–3.5) mm wide; pistillate scale (1.3–)1.5–2.2
                                   (–2.5) mm long; pistilate scale awn 0–0.8(–1) mm long; dorsal
                                   leaf sheath frequently green mottled with white dots C. leavenworthii
                             19. Perigynia bodies ovate or suborbicular; perigynia beaks 0.8–
                                  1.1 mm long with a double row of serrations, gradually taper-
                                  ing from the shoulder of the perigynium; widest leaf blade
                                  (1.9)2.5–4.4 mm wide; leaves per fertile culm (4–)5–8; culm
                                  width, ca. 2 cm above rootstock, 1.7–3.2(–3.3) mm wide; pistil-
                                  late scale 1.1–1.7(–1.9) mm long; pistillate scale awn 0–3.2 mm
                                  long; dorsal leaf sheath mostly green, infrequently green
                                  mottled with white dots                                          C. cephalophora    a
                     16. Adaxial or both adaxial and abaxial leaf surfaces minutely papillose
                         (sandpaper-like), at least near distal end (this can be detected by plac-
                         ing a leaf between the thumb and index finger and sliding the fingers
                         toward the distal end of the leaf; also easily seen with a hand lens).
                                                                                     CAREX /CYPERACEAE 1113

                        20. Inflorescence capitate (short triangular in outline), 12–19 mm long,
                             9–14 mm wide; leaves conspicuously shorter than culm, (6.5–)8.4–
                             21(–23) mm long; ventral surface of perigynia veinless, the dorsal
                             surface veinless or rarely with 1–4 incomplete narrow veins (ca.
                             0.1–0.2 mm wide)                                                       C. mesochorea
                        20. Inflorescence short-oblong, oblong, or linear, not short triangular
                             in outline, (12–)13.5–47 mm long, 6–18(–28) mm wide, the central
                             axis visible, at least between some spikes, usually the lowest two;
                             leaves shorter or longer than culm, 11.3–46.4(–55.5) mm long; ven-
                             tral surface of perigynia 0–15 veined, the dorsal surface 0–12-
                             veined.
                              21. Ventral surface of perigynia with (5–)6–15 conspicuous broad
                                  veins (ca. 0.05 mm wide), the dorsal surface with (0–)1–12
                                  broad veins                              C. muehlenbergii var. muehlenbergii
                              21. Ventral surface of perigynia with 0–6(–8) narrow veins (ca. 0.01–
                                  0.02 mm wide), the dorsal surface with 0–11(–14) narrow veins.
                                  22. Bodies of pistillate scales 3–4.2(–4.3) mm long, (1–)1.6–2.6
                                      (–3) mm wide, the mid-stripe 3-veined, rarely 1-veined;
                                      culms usually forming an angle of 50˚ or less with the
                                      ground                                                             C. austrina
                                  22. Bodies of pistillate scales (1.5–)1.8–3.1 mm long, (1–)1.2–
                                      1.8(–2.2) mm wide, the mid-stripe 1-veined, occasionally
                                      3-veined; culms usually forming an angle of 70˚ or more
                                      with the ground.
                                      23. Beaks of perigynia 0.2–0.6(–1) mm long, abruptly aris-
                                           ing from apex of perigynium; perigynia broadly ovate,
                                           (1.5–)2.5–3.8 mm long; dorsal leaf sheaths frequently
                                           green mottled white dots                C. muehlenbergii var. enervis
                                      23. Beaks of perigynia (1–)1.4–1.7(–1.8) mm long, taper-
                                           ing from shoulders or occasionally abruptly arising
                                           from apex of perigynia; perigynia ovate or ovate-del-
                                           toid, 3.2–5.2(–5.6) mm long; most dorsal leaf sheaths
                                           infrequently mottled with white dots                      C. perdentata
   6. Primary spicate branches more than 10, often these primary branches will re-
      branch into secondary branches.
      24. Most leaves equal to or exceeding the culms; perigynia 1–1.8 mm wide, narrowly
          ovate; beak of the perigynium tapering from the body, the beak 1/2 as long to as
          long as the body                                                                          C. vulpinoidea
      24. Most leaves shorter than the culms; perigynia 1.6–3 mm wide, narrowly ovate to
          broadly ovate, orbicular, OR reniform; beak of the perigynium usually arising abruptly
          from the body but can taper from the body, the beak to ca. 1/2 the length of the
          body.
           25. Perigynia with red glandular dots, orbicular to reniform, often broader than
               long; pistillate scales not conspicuous                                              C. triangularis
           25. Perigynia without red glandular dots, narrowly ovate to ovate orbicular, rarely
               broader than long; pistillate scales usually conspicuous                                      C. fissa
5. Terminal or all spikes gynecandrous, the spikes frequently appearing clavate.
   26. Perigynia bodies oblanceolate, mostly less than 1.5 mm wide; perigynium
       wing restricted to upper half of body                                                         C. tribuloides
1114 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

           26. Perigynia bodies ovate, obovate, orbicular, or reniform, 1.5–6 mm wide; perigynium
               wing not restricted to upper half of body.
               27. Perigynia with several obvious veins over the achene on the inner (ventral) surface.
                    28. Perigynia beaks 1.5–2.5 mm long; perigynia 5–20(–25) per spike; spikes
                         2–4 per culm                                                                               C. hyalina
                    28. Perigynia beaks less than 1.5(–1.8) mm long; perigynia 25–80 per spike; spikes
                         3–8 per culm.
                         29. Perigynium body widest above the middle, the body more or less obovate.
                              30. Styles abruptly contorted just above the achene; perigynium beak
                                  abruptly tapered to a long tip, spreading at maturity                   C. albolutescens
                              30. Styles straight to somewhat sinuous; perigynium beak usually gradu-
                                  ally tapering into a peak, appressed, not spreading at maturity.
                                  31. Achenes 0.8–1.2 mm wide; perigynia 1.6–2.8 mm wide, 4–6(–7)
                                       veined over achene abaxially.
                                       32. Pistillate scales reddish; inflorescences of robust culms arched
                                           or nodding, 2.3–8.4 cm long, the spikes strongly separated;
                                           spikes clavate, the staminate portion of well-developed spikes
                                           2–11 mm long                                                          C. ozarkana
                                       32. Pistillate scales hyaline-white; inflorescences of robust culms
                                           erect, 1–4.5 cm long, the spikes slightly separated to congested;
                                           spikes rounded to acute at base, the staminate portion of
                                           spikes < 2 mm long                                                         C. longii
                                  31. Achenes 1.4–1.8 mm wide; larger perigynia 2.5–3.3(–3.4) mm wide,
                                       veinless or few-veined abaxially                                             C. brevior
                         29. Perigynium body widest at or below the middle, the body more or less
                              orbicular.
                              33. Larger perigynia 2.5–3.8(–4.2) mm long                                       C. festucacea
                              33. Larger perigynia 4.2–5.2 mm long                                           C. aff. bicknellii
               27. Perigynia veinless or rarely with 1–3 faint veins over the achene on the inner
                     (ventral) surface.
                     34. Perigynia finely granular-papillose (at 30 x magnification), the bodies reni-
                         form, wider than long, (2.6–)3.2–5 mm wide                                             C. reniformis
                     34. Perigynia smooth, the bodies more or less orbicular or rarely obovate, 1.5–6
                          mm wide.
                          35. Perigynia obovate                                                                     C. brevior
                          35. Perigynia more or less orbicular.
                              36. Larger perigynia 1.5–3.4 mm wide.
                                  37. Achenes 1.4–1.8 mm wide, 1.7–2 mm long; larger perigynia
                                        3.4–4.5 mm long, 2.5–3.3(–3.4) mm wide                                      C. brevior
                                  37. Achenes (1–)1.1–1.35 mm wide, 1.3–1.7 mm long; larger perigynia
                                        2.5–3.9(–4.2) mm long, 1.5–2.5 mm wide                                 C. festucacea
                              36. Larger perigynia 3.7–6 mm wide                                             C. tetrastachya a
1. Achenes 3-sided, trigonous or obscurely terete in cross-section; stigmas 3.
   38. Styles continuous with the achene, of the same color and texture as the achene, persistent.
       39. Larger perigynia 1 cm long or longer, including beaks.
           40. Pistillate spike outline tending to be globose; perigynia loosely arranged, spreading,
               drying dark olive-drab green                                                                  C. intumescens
           40. Pistillate spike outline oblong to cylindric; perigynia either loosely arranged or not,
               drying stramineous, green, or light olive-drab green.
                                                                                         CAREX /CYPERACEAE 1115

            41. Staminate peduncles greatly exceeding the uppermost pistillate spike; perigynia
                loosely arranged; elongate rhizomes present                                              C. louisianicaa
            41. Staminate peduncles shorter than to only slightly exceeding the uppermost pis-
                tillate spike; perigynia tightly arranged; elongate rhizomes absent                         C. lupulina
    39. Larger perigynia 4–9(–9.5) mm long, including beaks.
        42. Larger perigynia 7–9(–9.5) mm long, including beaks; beaks 3–4 mm long                             C. lurida
        42. Larger perigynia 4–6.5 mm long, including beaks; beaks 2 mm long or less.
            43. Perigynia mostly squarrose to the rachis (at ca. 90˚ angle); achenes conspicu-
                 ously obovate, conspicuously minutely granular-papillose; beaks of perigynia
                 abruptly arising from perigynium body                                                        C. frankii
            43. Perigynia ascending along the rachis; achenes broadly elliptic, not conspicuously
                 minutely granular-papillose; beaks of perigynia gradually tapering from
                 perigynium body                                                                       C. hyalinolepis
38. Styles not continuous with the achene, usually not of the same color and/or texture as the
    achene, not persistent, withering.
    44. Perigynia pubescent, at least apically, often minutely so (use 25 x magnification).
        45. Perigynia mostly concealed by pistillate scales; pistillate scales 2–3.2 mm long.
            46. Spikes borne close together above the middle of the culm, usually exceeding
                the leaves                                                                   C. albicans var. australis
            46. Spikes, at least some, borne near the base of the culm, the leaves exceeding
                the spikes                                                                           C. microrhyncha
        45. Perigynia conspicuous, not concealed by pistillate scales; pistillate scales (3–)3.5–4
            mm long                                                                                   C. planostachyss
    44. Perigynia glabrous.
        47. Spikes, at least some, borne at or near base of plant.
            48. Beaks of perigynia conspicuous, 3–3.5 mm long; spikes on long capillary peduncles
                 to 15 cm long; shoot bases reddish                                                       C. basiantha
            48. Beaks of perigynia not conspicuous, less than 0.5 mm long; spikes either not on
                 capillary peduncles or peduncles less than 5 cm long; shoot bases either reddish
                 or white.
                 49. Staminate spikes sessile; shoot bases white followed by pale brown                  C. abscondita
                 49. Staminate spikes pedunculate; shoot bases reddish                                C. edwardsiana
        47. Spikes borne well above base of plant.
            50. Spikes, predominantly gynecandrous.
                 51. Spikes arising lateral on flexuous peduncles, the spikes drooping.
                      52. Longest pistillate scales with awns 1.2–5 mm long; perigynia 4.5–6 mm
                          long, ovate-lanceolate                                                              C. davisii
                      52. Longest pistillate scales acuminate or short-awned, the awns 0–0.5(–2)
                          mm long; perigynia 3.5–5 mm long, rhomboid or narrowly elliptic, broad-
                          est near the middle and tapering to both ends                                     C. oxylepis
                 51. Spikes terminal on culm, the spikes stiff, ascending.
                      53. Perigynia ascending along the rachis, appearing flattened on the side
                         next to the rachis, the perigynia not appearing inflated                       C. complanata
                      53. Perigynia spreading (to ca. 90˚), or only slightly ascending along the ra-
                          chis, not flattened on the side next to the rachis, the perigynia inflated.
                          54. Pistillate scales 3–6 mm long, including awn; achenes 2.1–2.6 mm
                               long; plants of dry upland prairies and open grassy areas                       C. bushii
                          54. Pistillate scales (2–)2.5–3 mm long, including awn; achenes 1.5–2 mm
                               long; plants most frequently in low wet woods, wooded swamps, river
                               flood plain forests, less frequent in open grassy areas                  C. caroliniana
1116 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

            50. Spikes, at least some, usually the terminal, solely staminate.
                55. Spikes arising lateral on flexuous peduncles, the spikes drooping.
                    56. Pistillate spikes (some are androgynous) 7–9 mm wide; rhizomatous
                         perennials; rhizome 3–12 mm thick                                             C. cherokeensis
                    56. Pistillate spikes (solely pistillate) 2–3 mm wide; tufted perennials                   C. debilis
                55. Spikes terminal or lateral but not on flexuous peduncles, the spikes not
                    drooping.
                    57. Most of the beaks of perigynia conspicuously bent.
                         58. Pistillate scales brown, reddish brown, or reddish purple on both
                             sides of the mid-vein; plants with creeping rhizomes                              C. meadii
                         58. Pistillate scales green or hyaline on both sides of the mid-vein; plants
                             without creeping rhizomes.
                             59. Veins on faces of the perigynia raised.
                                  60. Perigynia 1.6–2.5 mm wide                                            C. granularis
                                  60. Perigynia 1–1.3 mm wide.
                                       61. Perigynia obovoid, 2.4–2.6 mm long, with a short, abruptly
                                            bent beak                                                          C. blanda
                                       61. Perigynia fusiform, 3.4–5 mm long, tapering into a curved,
                                            more or less elongate beak                                       C. striatula
                             59. Veins on faces of the perigynia impressed.
                                  62. Larger perigynia (4–)4.2–6 mm long; style base straight or
                                      slightly bent                                                   C. flaccosperma
                                  62. Larger perigynia 3.2–4.1 mm long; style base usually conspicu-
                                      ously bent or reflexed                                              C. glaucodea
                    57. Most of the beaks of perigynia straight, not bent.
                         63. Plants with elongate creeping rhizomes                                     C. microdonta
                         63. Plants tufted, without elongate rhizomes.
                             64. Perigynia distichously arranged along the rachis                        C. bulbostylis
                             64. Perigynia spirally arranged along the rachis.
                                  65. Shoot bases brown, often white above the brown.
                                       66. Perigynia (4–)4.2–6 mm long; style base straight or slightly
                                           bent                                                       C. flaccosperma
                                       66. Perigynia 3.2–4.1 mm long; style base usually conspicu-
                                           ously bent or reflexed                                          C. glaucodea
                                  65. Shoot bases purplish red.
                                       67. Perigynia 2–2.6 mm wide, orbicular to suborbicular in
                                           cross-section; achene bodies (excluding stipe) 2.2–3 mm
                                           long                                                                 C. grisea
                                       67. Perigynia 1.5–2.3 mm wide, obtusely triangular in cross-
                                           section; achene bodies (excluding stipe)1.8–2.3 mm              C. corrugata

Carex abscondita Mack., (concealed), HIDDEN-FRUIT CARIC SEDGE. Wet to mesic, shaded decidu-
ous hardwood forests, pine forests, or swamps; in ne part of nc TX in Red River Co., probably in
other ne cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portion of Gulf Prairies and
Marshes. Fruiting Apr–Jun. Section Careyanae

Carex albicans Willd. ex Spreng. var. australis (L.H. Bailey) Rettig., (sp.: whitish; var.: southern),
SOUTHERN BELLOWS -BEAK CARIC SEDGE. Sandy or rocky woods, frequently on slopes in mixed
pine-hardwood forests; Dallas, Delta, Hopkins, Lamar, and Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savan-
nah and Pineywoods. Fruiting Apr–Jun. [C. physorhynchaLiebm. ex Steud.] Section Acrocystis
                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1117




     Carex arkansana [ MAC]             Carex austrina [MAC]




Carex basiantha [MAC]           Carex blanda [MAC]




     Carex brevior [MAC ]               Carex bulbostylis [MAC]
1118 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

Carex albolutescens Schwein., (whitish yellow), WHITISH YELLOW CARIC SEDGE. Wet woods,
thickets, and peats; Delta, Hopkins, Lamar, and Milam cos.; also Post Oak Savannah and
Pineywoods. Fruiting Apr–Jun(–Aug). Section Ovales

Carex arkansana L.H. Bailey, (of Arkansas), ARKANSAS CARIC SEDGE. Openings in low, seasonally
wet woods, open bottomlands, damp prairies associated with creeks; Dallas, Hopkins, Kaufman
and Red River cos., probably in other ne cos.; also Post Oak Savannah and Pineywoods. Fruiting
May–Jun. Section Phaestoglochin

Carex austrina (Small) Mack., (southern), SOUTHERN CARIC SEDGE. Obligate heliophyte (= a plant
adapted to grow in or tolerate full sun) in open prairies in alfisols, but occasional in mollisols
and vertisols, and encroaching on histosols; throughout most of nc TX; also Rolling Plains, Post
Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, s to the Coastal Bend Area of the Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruit-
ing Mar–early Jul. [C. muehlenbergii Schkuhr ex Willd. var. australis Olney, C. muehlenbergii
var. austrina Small] Section Phaestoglochin

Carex basiantha Steud., (basal-flowered), BASAL-FRUIT CARIC SEDGE. Ravine slopes of mixed
pine-hardwood forests and dedicuous woods; usually in rocky or sandy soils; in the ne part of
nc TX in Red River Co., and probably in other ne cos.; also Post Oak Savannah and Pineywoods.
Fruiting late-Mar–Jul. [C. willdenowii of American authors, not Schkuhr ex Willd.] Section
Phyllostachyae

Carex blanda Dewey, (mild), CHARMING CARIC SEDGE. In dry to mesic woods, bottomlands,
slopes, forest edges, and meadows; Bell, Bosque, Collin, Cooke, Dallas, Grayson, Hunt, Johnson,
Lamar, Parker, Red River, Tarrant, and Williamson cos. ; also Post Oak Savannah, Edwards Pla-
teau, Pineywoods, and Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May(–Jun). Section Laxiflorae

Carex brevior (Dewey) Mack. ex Lunell, (short), SHORT CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte found in
submesic open meadows, prairies, and roadsides; Navarro, Delta, Hopkins, Lamar, Milam, and
Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portions of Gulf Prairies and
Marshes. Fruiting late Apr–Jun. Section Ovales

Carex bulbostylis Mack., (bulb-styled), GLOBOSE CARIC SEDGE. Mesic deciduous forests, flood
plains and adjacent slopes; usually in neutral soils or slightly acidic or slightly alkaline, loams,
sandy loams, sandy clay loams, or clay loams; widespread in nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah,
Edwards Plateau, Pineywoods, and upper portions of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr-
May. [C. amphibola Steud. var. globosa(L.H. Bailey) L.H. Bailey] Section Griseae

Carex bushii Mack., (for its discoverer, Benjamin Franklin Bush, 1858–1937, postmaster in MO
and amateur botanist), BENJAMIN BUSH’S CARIC SEDGE. Obligate to facultative heliophyte in open
mesic to submesic prairies, open roadsides, and forest edges with sandy soils; Dallas, Denton,
Kaufman, Lamar, and Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portions
of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May. [C. caroliniana Schwein. var. cuspidata (Dewey)
Shinners] Section Porocystis

Carex caroliniana Schwein., (of Carolina), CAROLINA CARIC SEDGE. Facultative sciophyte (= a
plant adapted to grow in or tolerate shade) in deciduous woods, usually lower slopes and in bot-
toms, near wooded streams, sandy soils; in ne part of nc TX in Delta, Hopkins, and Lamar cos.;
also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portions of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting
Apr–May. Section Porocystis

Carex cephalophora Muhl. ex Willd., (bearing heads), HEAD-BEARING CARIC SEDGE. A sciophyte,
primarily in alfisols with sandy or sandy loam soils, slopes in mesic to submesic hardwood for-
ests, or mixed hardwood pine forest, or occasionally at wetter sites in entisols along stream
                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1119




            Carex bushii [MAC]                               Carex caroliniana [MAC]




         Carex cephalophora [ MAC]                                Carex cherokeensis [MAC]




Carex complanata [MAC]               Carex corrugata [HEA]                     Carex crinita var. brevicrinis [STE ]
1120 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

courses, occasionally remaining as remnants in openings, pastures, or roadsides; Ellis and Red
River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, but more frequent in the Pineywoods. Fruiting (late Mar–)
late Apr–late Jul(–early Oct). Section Phaestoglochin

Carex cherokeensis Schwein., (from its occurrence in "Cherokee country"), CHEROKEE CARIC
SEDGE. Low open, damp, deciduous woods with sandy or sandy loam soils, frequently calcare-
ous; Dallas, Hopkins, Hunt, Kaufman, Lamar, Milam, Navarro, Red River, Tarrant, and Wise cos.;
also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portions of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting
Apr–May(–early Jun). Section Hymenochlaenae

Carex complanata Torr. & Hook., (flattened), FLAT-FRUIT CARIC SEDGE. In shade or full sun, usu-
ally in open mesic deciduous forests with sandy soils, forest edges, or clear-cuts; in ne part of nc
TX in Delta, Hopkins, and Lamar cos.; also Pineywoods, Post Oak Savannah, and upper portions
of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May(–Jun). Section Porocystis

Carex corrugata Fernald, (corrugated or wrinkled), WRINKLE-FRUIT CARIC SEDGE. Floodplains of
mesic deciduous forests, alluvia, in acidic to alkaline clays, to silt loams; Dallas, Delta, Fannin,
Hopkins, Jack, and Lamar cos.; probably in every e county of nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah,
Pineywoods, and upper portions of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May. Section
Griseae

Carex crinita Lam. var. brevicrinis Fernald, (sp.: provided with long hair; var.: short-haired),
SHORT-HAIR CARIC SEDGE. Wooded swamps and bottoms; ne part of nc TX in Red River Co.,
likely in other ne cos.; also Pineywoods and upper portions of Post Oak Savannah. Fruiting
May–Jun. Section Phacocystis

Carex crus-corvi Shuttlew. ex Kunze, (crow-spur), CROW-FOOT CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte in wet
prairies, depressions, roadside ditches, marshes, and open swamps; widespread in nc TX; also
Post Oak Savannah, Edwards Plateau, Pineywoods, Gulf Prairies and Marshes, and s Texas
Plains. Fruiting (late Feb–)Apr–Jun(–early Jul). Section Vulpinae

Carex davisii Schwein. & Torr., (for Emerson Davis, 1798–1866, amateur student of Carex ),
EMERSON DAVIS’ CARIC SEDGE. Rich, deciduous, calcareous woods, forest edges, meadows, and
shores; Dallas, Delta, Denton, Hopkins, Hunt, Johnson, Kaufman, and Tarrant cos.; also upper
portion of Post Oak Savannah. Fruiting Apr–May(–mid-Jun). Section Hymenochlaenae

Carex debilis Michx., (frail), WEAK CARIC SEDGE. Low woods, swamps, forest edges, and espe-
cially along creek margins; ne part of nc TX in Delta, Lamar, and Red River cos.; also Post Oak
Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May(–
Jul). Section Hymenochlaenae

Carex edwardsiana E.L. Bridges & Orzell, (of the Edwards Plateau), EDWARDS PLATEAU CARIC
SEDGE . Mesic to submesic mixed juniper-hardwood forests and ravine slopes, alkaline clay
loams and sandy clay loams; s part of nc TX in Bell Co.; also Edwards Plateau, mostly in the
Balcones Canyonlands; endemic to TX. Fruiting Apr–May. [C. oligocarpa of Texas authors in
part, not Schkuhr ex Willd.] Section Griseae E

Carex emoryi Dewey, (for Major William Helmsley Emory, 1811–1887, American soldier who
worked on U.S./Mexican boundary survey), WILLIAM EMORY’S CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte along
margins of streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, marshes, and open swamps, usually on calcareous soils;
Bell, Cooke, Dallas, Milam, and Williamson cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, Edwards
Plateau, and Rolling Plains. Fruiting Mar–May. Section Phacocystis

Carex festucacea Schkuhr ex Willd., (fescue-like), FESCUE-LIKE CARIC SEDGE. Damp or wet low
areas in woods; Dallas, Delta, Hopkins, Lamar, and Milam cos. in e part of nc TX; also Post Oak
                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1121




Carex crus-corvi [MAC]                     Carex davisii [MAC]




        Carex debilis [MAC]            Carex edwardsiana [PHY]




    Carax emoryi [MAC]                  Carex festucacea [MAC]
1122 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May(–
early Jun). Section Ovales

Carex fissa Mack., (split), SHARP-MARGIN CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte in open, wet, roadside
ditches and in open wet areas in floodplains, usually in alluvial clay soils; Dallas, Hopkins,
Hunt, Kaufman, and Milam cos.; also Post Oak Savannah and upper portion of Gulf Prairies
and Marshes. Fruiting May–Jun. Section Multiflorae

Carex flaccosperma Dewey, (flaccid, weak, or soft-seeded or -fruited), FLACCID-FRUIT CARIC
SEDGE. Usually found in floodplains in mesic deciduous forests, in acidic silt loams, sandy
loams, sandy clay loams, clays, and loams; e and ne parts of nc TX in Delta, Fannin, Henderson,
Hopkins, Hunt, Kaufman, and Lamar cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper por-
tion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May. Section Griseae

Carex frankii Kunth, (for its discoverer, Joseph Frank, 1782–1835, German botanist, physician,
and traveler in U.S.) JOSEPH FRANK’S CARIC SEDGE. Low deciduous woods, bottomlands, and wet
meadows, usually in calcareous or neutral soils; Bell, Bosque, Delta, Fannin, Grayson,
Henderson, Hunt, Hopkins, Lamar, Milam, and Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah,
Pineywoods, upper portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes, Edwards Plateau, and Trans-Pecos.
Fruiting May–Sep(–early Nov). Section Squarrosae

Carex glaucodea Tuck. ex Olney, (gray-green), GRAY-GREEN-FRUIT CARIC SEDGE. Along edges and
in openings of mesic deciduous forests or in ephemeral wet prairies, in acidic to alkaline loams,
or clays; ne part of nc TX in Hopkins and Lamar cos., probably in other ne cos.; also upper Post
Oak Savannah and upper Pineywoods. Fruiting May–Jun(–early Jul). [C. flaccospermaDewey
var. glaucodea (Tuck. ex Olney) Kük.] Section Griseae

Carex granularis Muhl. ex Willd., (granular, covered with minute grains), GRANULAR CARIC
SEDGE. Calcareous rich woods, shores, meadows, and bottomlands, usually in calcareous soils;
ne part of nc TX in Hopkins, Hunt, Lamar, and Red River cos.; also Pineywoods and upper Post
Oak Savannah. Fruiting May–Jun. [C. granularis var. haleana (Olney) Porter] Section
Granulares

Carex gravida L.H. Bailey, (heavy with fruit), HEAVY-FRUIT CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte in open
swales, seepy areas, damp or mesic prairies with calcareous soils; Bell, Burnet, Dallas, Denton,
Hamilton, Hunt, Navarro, Palo Pinto, Tarrant, and Wise cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Rolling
Plains, and High Plains. Fruiting May-Jun. [C. gravida var. lunelliana (Mack.) F.J. Herm., C.
lunelliana Mack.] Section Phaestoglochin

Carex grisea Wahlenb., (gray), INFLATED CARIC SEDGE. Floodplains of mesic deciduous forests,
acidic to alkaline sandy loams, loams, sandy clay loams, and clay loams; Dallas, Delta, Ellis,
Fannon, Grayson, Hunt, Kaufman, and Palo Pinto cos.; also Post Oak Savannah and Rolling
Plains. Fruiting Apr–Jun(–early Jul). [C. amphibola Steud. var. turgida Fernald] Section Griseae

Carex hyalina Boott, (transparent, translucent), FEW -FLOWER CARIC SEDGE, TISSUE SEDGE. A
sciophyte of bottomland hardwood forests, usually on secondary flood terraces in wet neutral
clay soils but can be slightly acid or slightly alkaline; frequent along the Trinity and Sulphur
rivers and their tributaries; less frequent along the Brazos River; Dallas, Delta, Denton, Ellis,
Henderson, Hopkins, Hunt, Kaufman, Lamar, Navarro, and Red River cos.; also Pineywoods, up-
per portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes, and Post Oak Savannah. Fruiting mid-Mar–mid-
May(–mid-Jun). Section Ovales (TOES 1993: V) m

Carex hyalinolepis Steud., (with transparent or translucent scales), HYALINE-SCALE CARIC SEDGE.
A heliophyte forming massive colonies; found in open roadside ditches, swales, shores, marshes,
                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1123




     Carex fissa [MAC]                   Carex flaccosperma [MAC ]




           Carex frankii [MAC]                Carex glaucodea [MAC ]




Carex granularis [MAC]                    Carex gravida [MAC]
1124 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

and open swamps, frequently in black calcareous or neutral clay; Dallas, Delta, Ellis, Hopkins,
Navarro, and Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah and upper portion of Gulf Prairies and
Marshes. Fruiting Apr–May(–early Jul). Section Paludosae

Carex intumescens Rudge, (swollen, puffed up), BLADDERY CARIC SEDGE. Swampy woods, bot-
tomland hardwood forests, acidic soils; Red River Co. in ne part of nc TX; also Post Oak Savan-
nah, Pineywoods, and upper portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Mar–Sep. Section
Lupulinae

Carex leavenworthii Dewey, (for its discoverer, Melines Conklin Leavenworth, 1796–1862, s U.S.
botanist), MELINES LEAVENWORTH’S CARIC SEDGE. Primarily a heliophyte but grows more robust
in shade, primarily in alfisols with sandy or sandy loam soils, occasionally in entisols, histosols,
or mollisols, open mesic to submesic sites, occasionally in wetter sites, forest edges, forest open-
ings, pastures, roadsides, lawn weed, appears to do better in recently disturbed sites as a succes-
sional species, but persists; widespread in nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, upper
Gulf Prairies and Marshes, and upper South Texas Plains. Fruiting (mid-Feb–)mid-Mar–early
Jul(–late Oct). [C. cephalophora Muhl. ex Willd. var. angustifolia Boott; C. cephalophora var.
leavenworthii (Dewey) Kük.]. Section Phaestoglochin

Carex longii Mack., (for Bayard Henry Long, 1885–1969, of Philadelphia), BAYARD LONG’S CARIC
SEDGE. A facultative heliophyte in open damp or wet sites, usually in sandy, agrillaceous or
peaty soils; Delta, Hopkins, Lamar, and Milam, cos. in e part of nc TX, undoubtedly in other cos.
within nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, upper portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes.
Fruiting May–Jul(–Nov). Section Ovales

Carex louisianica L.H. Bailey, (of Louisiana), LOUISIANA CARIC SEDGE. Swampy woods, bottom-
land hardwood forests, acidic soils; in Red River drainage in Fannin Co.; also Post Oak Savan-
nah, Pineywoods, and upper portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–Aug. Section
Lupulinae

Carex lupulina Muhl. ex Willd., (resembling Humulus lupulus—hops), HOP CARIC SEDGE. Open
swamps, wet ditches, somewhat acidic-neutral to calcareous soils; Hopkins, Lamar, Milam, and
Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, e porton of Edwards Plateau, upper por-
tion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Apr–Oct. Section Lupulinae

Carex lurida Wahlenb., (sallow, pale yellow), SALLOW CARIC SEDGE. Open swales and open
swamps; Denton, Lamar, Milam, and Red River cos., expected in other e cos. within nc TX; also
Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting late-Apr–early
Jul(–Aug). Section Vesicariae

Carex meadii Dewey, (for its discoverer, Samuel Barnum Mead, 1798–1880, botanist and physi-
cian of CT and IL), SAMUEL MEAD’S CARIC SEDGE, MEAD’S CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte in open
mesic to wet calcareous clay prairies and depressions; in ne part of nc TX in Dallas, Grayson,
Kaufman, and Lamar cos.; also upper Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting late-Mar–mid-May(–
early Jun). Section Paniceae

Carex mesochorea Mack., (midland), MIDLAND CARIC SEDGE. A facultative to obligate heliophyte
growing in entisols near hardwood forest edges or in openings, in pastures, or roadsides, usually
on sandy or sandy loam soils, appears to need disturbance as a successional species; the only
known station in TX is from Tarrant Co. Fruiting late Mar–late Jul. [C. cephalophora Muhl. ex
Willd. var. mesochorea (Mack.) Gleason] Section Phaestoglochin

Carex microdonta Torr. & Hook., (small-toothed), SMALL-TOOTH CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte in
calcareous shores, gravels, meadows, prairies, and glades; Bell, Collin, Coryell, Dallas, Lampasas,
                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1125




       Carex grisea [MAC ]          Carex hyalina [MAC]




  Carex hyalinolepis [MAC ]          Carex intumescens [MAC]




Carex leavenworthii [MAC]                 Carex longii [MAC]
1126 CYPERACEAE/CAREX




               Carex louisianica [MAC]                 Carex lupulina [MAC]




                     Carex lurida [MAC]   Carex meadii [MAC]




                Carex mesochorea [MAC]              Carex microdonta [MAC]
                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1127




 Carex microrhyncha [MAC]                         Carex muehlenbergii var. enervis [MAC]




Carex muehlenbergii var muehlenbergii [MAC]                      Carex oxylepis [MAC]




 Carex ozarkana [ BTT]                           Carex perdentata [SID]
1128 CYPERACEAE/CAREX

Milam, Mills, and Tarrant cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, South Texas Plains, Edwards Plateau,
and Trans-Pecos. Fruiting late Apr–Jun. Section Granulares

Carex microrhyncha Mack., (small-beaked), SMALL-BEAK CARIC SEDGE. Submesic oak-hickory
forests or oak-juniper woodlands, at base of trees or in semi-open areas with sandy or gravely
sandy soils; Delta, Milam, Parker, and Red River Cos.; also Pineywoods and Post Oak Savannah.
Fruiting early Mar–Apr(–May). Section Acrocystis

Carex muehlenbergii Schkuhr ex Willd. (for Gotthilf Henry Ernest Muhlenberg, 1753–1815, Ger-
man-educated Pennsylvania pioneer botanist). See key to species to separate varieties. Section
Phaestoglochin

var. enervis Boott, (nerveless), GOTTHILF MUHLENBERG’S VEINLESS CARIC SEDGE. Obligate to facul-
tative sciophyte, but in some habitats growing as a remnant in full sun, in mesic or submesic
hardwood forests (frequently oak-hickory woods), alfisols, less frequent in entisols, vertisols, or
histosols, regardless, most frequently found in sandy soils with a humus layer or thin soils over
limestone with a humus layer; widespread in nc TX; also Pineywoods, upper Gulf Prairies and
Marshes, and e Edwards Plateau. Fruiting Apr–Jul(–Oct). [C. onusta Mack., C. plana Mack.]

var. muehlenbergii, GOTTHILF MUHLENBERG’S CARIC SEDGE. Obligate to facultative heliophyte in
entisols of open sand dunes, openings in sandy oak-hickory woods, sandy forest edges, open to
semi-open sandstone outcrops, open pine barrens, or on thin soils over limestone, occasionally
in alfisols or even histosols; Erath, Henderson, Lamar, Milam, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; also upper
portions of Post Oak Savannah and Pineywoods. Fruiting (late Mar–)late Apr–mid-Aug(–early Sep).

Carex oxylepis Torr. & Hook., (sharp-scaled), SHARP-SCALE CARIC SEDGE. Rich moist hardwood
forests, frequently along floodplains of forest creeks; ne and se portion of nc TX in Hunt, Lamar,
Milam, and Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portion of Gulf
Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting Mar–Apr(–early Jun). Section Hymenochlaenae

Carex ozarkana P. Rothr. & Reznicek, (of the Ozarks), OZARK CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte in early
successional wetlands on mineral soils, often in association with seepage, seepy banks of
streams, permanently wet ditches, pond shores, and wet depressions in meadows and pastures;
these sites are usually dominated by Juncus species; the soils are loamy, ranging from clay
loams to silt loams, usually acidic; Hopkins and Lamar cos. in ne part of nc TX; also Upper Post
Oak Savannah. Fruiting May. Section Ovales

Carex perdentata S.D. Jones, (having teeth), CONSPICUOUSLY-TOOTHED CARIC SEDGE. A facultative
sciophyte, primarily in sandy loams, sandstone outcrops, granitic outcrops, or thin soils over
limestone, open mesic to submesic hardwood forests, or open hardwood-juniper forest, or wood-
lands in savannas on granite outcrops; w 2/3 of nc TX; also Edwards Plateau. Fruiting mid-
Mar–early Jun. Section PhaestoglochinThis species, endemic to TX and OK, was described in
1994 (Jones 1994b).

Carex planostachys Kunze, (flat-spiked), CEDAR CARIC SEDGE. Dry oak-juniper or scrub on cal-
careous soils; Bell, Bosque, Coryell, Dallas, Hamilton, Hill, Hood, Johnson, McLennan, Parker,
Somervell, and Tarrant cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Edwards Plateau, Gulf Prairies and
Marshes, and Trans-Pecos. Fruiting Mar–May. Section Halleranae

Carex reniformis (L.H. Bailey) Small, (kidney-shaped), KIDNEY-SHAPED CARIC SEDGE. A facultative
sciophyte in wet woods and sloughs; Hopkins, Red River, and Tarrant Cos.; also Piney-
woods, Post Oak Savannah, and upper portion of Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting May–Jun.
Section Ovales

Carex retroflexa Muhl. ex Willd., (bent backward), REFLEXED-FRUIT CARIC SEDGE. Dry rocky or
                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1129




Carex planostachys [MAC]            Carex reniformis [MAC]




     Carex retroflexa [MAC]            Carex socialis [BTT]




     Carex striatula [MAC]            Carex tetrastachya [MAC]
1130 CYPERACEAE/CLADIUM

sandy woods, thickets, and forest edges; widespread in nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah,
Pineywoods, upper Gulf Prairies and Marshes, and e Edwards Plateau. Fruiting late Mar–May(–
Jun). Section Phaestoglochin

Carex socialis Mohlenbr. & Schwegman, (sociable), COMPANION CARIC SEDGE. A facultative
sciophyte in clay or sandy clay soils of secondary terraces of river floodplains; in the ne corner
of nc TX in Red River Co., probably also in other ne cos., also Henderson Co. on the e margin of
nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting late
Mar–May. Section Phaestoglochin

Carex striatula Michx., (with fine longitudinal lines), FINE-LINE CARIC SEDGE. A facultative
sciophyte, frequently on upper slopes of ravines in partial openings of deciduous forests; re-
ported in nc TX from Dallas Co., but probably also in Lamar, Red River, and Delta cos.; also Post
Oak Savannah and Pineywoods. Fruiting Mar–May. Section Laxiflorae

Carex tetrastachya Scheele, (four-spiked), FOUR-ANGLE CARIC SEDGE. Open, moist to wet sites,
wet prairies, roadside ditches, open swamp and marsh edges, most frequent in calcareous soils;
widespread in nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah, Gulf Prairies and Marshes, South Texas Plains,
Edwards Plateau, and rarely in Pineywoods. Fruiting Mar–May(–early Jun). [C. brittoniana L.H.
Bailey] Section Ovales

Carex texensis (Torr.) L.H. Bailey, (of Texas), TEXAS CARIC SEDGE. In submesic to mesic rocky, or
sandy woods and fields; Delta, Fannin, Hopkins, and Lamar cos. in the ne part of nc TX; also
Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting mid-Mar–mid-
May(–early Jun). [C. retroflexa Muhl. ex Willd. var. texensis (Torr.) Fernald] Section
Phaestoglochin

Carex triangularis Boeck., (triangular), TRIANGULAR CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte in open wet
roadside ditches and in open wet areas in floodplains, usually in alluvial clay soils; Delta,
Hopkins, Lamar, and Red River cos. in the ne part of nc TX; also Post Oak Savannah,
Pineywoods, and upper Gulf Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting May–Jun. Section Multiflorae

Carex tribuloides Wahlenb., (resembling Tribulus—caltrop), CALTROP CARIC SEDGE. Frequently
in the open in bottomlands, swales, swamp margins, and marshes; ne part of nc TX in Delta,
Lamar, and Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah, Pineywoods, and upper portion of Gulf
Prairies and Marshes. Fruiting May–Aug. Section Ovales

Carex vulpinoidea Michx., (resembling Carex vulpina, with inflorescence like a fox tail), FOX-
TAIL CARIC SEDGE. A heliophyte of wet roadside ditches, lakesides, pondsides, and open wet
floodplains, usually in clayey soils; ne part of nc TX in Delta, Denton, Fannin, Hopkins, Lamar,
and Red River cos.; also Post Oak Savannah and Pineywoods. Fruiting Jun–Aug. Section
Multiflorae.

Carex affinity bicknellii Reznicek [Ined.], (the species will not be named C. bicknellii, a name
already used in Carex ; however, this taxon has an affinity towards that species). No illustration
is available for this as yet unnamed species. A heliophyte in open wet swales and bottoms, de-
pressions, or wet roadside ditches or ones with emphemeral water, usually in sandy soils; in nc
TX in Delta, Kaufman, Lamar, Red River, and Tarrant cos.; also Fayette and Harris cos. to the e of
nc TX. May–Jun. Section Ovales

                          CLADIUM SAW-GRASS, TWIG-RUSH
Rhizomatous perennials; culms obtusely trigonous; leaves basal and cauline, with well-devel-
oped blades; leaf sheaths loose; inflorescences cymosely branched, with numerous spikelets;
spikelets with a single fertile floret subtended by 2–3 empty scales (these lacking achenes but
                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1131




Carex texensis [MAC]                      Carex triangularis [MAC ]




     Carex tribuloides [MAC]                  Carex vulpinoidea [MAC ]




          Cladium mariscoides [BB2]   Cladium mariscus subsp. jamaicense [GWO]
1132 CYPERACEAE/CYPERUS

can have stamens); scales of spikelets spirally imbricate; stamens 2; stigmas 2–3; perianth
bristles absent; achenes without tubercles.
A A genus of 2 species, 1 in North America, the other cosmopolitan. (Greek cladion, a
branchlet, from the repeatedly branched inflorescence of the first named species) Cladium
species superficially resemble some Rhynchospora taxa but can be easily distinguished by the
lack of tubercles on the achenes.

1. Leaf blades 1–3 mm wide, to ca. 0.3 m long, with margins scaberulous (= only slightly rough-
   ened, almost smooth to the touch); plants to 1 m tall                                        C. mariscoides
1. Leaf blades 5–15 mm wide, to 1 m long, with margins dangerously saw-toothed; plants to 3 m
   tall                                                                                             C. mariscus

Cladium mariscoides (Muhl.) Torr., (resembling Mariscus, a segregate now included in Cyperus),
TWIG RUSH. Plant 0.4–1 m tall; leaf blades involute, with scaberulous margins; inflorescences
5–30 cm long, slender, ca. 2–5 cm wide, usually of relatively few cymes, the inflorescences
much smaller than in C. mariscus, with spikelets in groups of 3–10 at the ends of short, erect
branches (peduncles); spikelets 3–6 mm long; achenes smooth, short cylindric, apiculate-
pointed, truncate basally, 2.5–3.5 mm long. Wet areas; Henderson Co. (Bridges & Orzell 1989)
near e margin of nc TX; mainly e TX; very rare in the state. Jul–Sep. [Mariscus mariscoides
(Muhl.) Kuntze]

Cladium mariscus (L.) J. Pohl subsp. jamaicense (Crantz) Kük., (sp.: for resemblance to Mariscus;
subsp.: of Jamaica), JAMAICAN SAW-GRASS, SAW-GRASS. Plant 1–3 m tall; leaf blades ca. 0.3–1 m
long, with dangerously spinulose-serrulate (= saw-toothed) margins and midrib (on lower sur-
face); inflorescences 20–80 cm long, 10–30 cm wide, much-branched, sometimes droopy, with
spikelets in groups of 2–6 at the ends of short branches; spikelets 3–5 mm long; achenes with
surfaces roughened, obovoid to subglobose, apiculate-pointed or obtuse, contracted basally, 2–3
mm long. Stream or lake margins, wet areas, often in calcareous soils; Dallas Co. (R. O’Kennon,
pers. obs.); also se part of the state, Edwards Plateau, and Trans-Pecos (Hatch et al. 1990). Jul–Oct.
[Mariscus jamaicense (Crantz) Britton]

                                       CYPERUS FLAT SEDGE
Annuals or usually perennials; plants largely glabrous except for scabrous-margined leaves;
culms (= stems) triangular; leaves basal or nearly so; inflorescences terminal, head-like or um-
bel-like, leafy-bracted at base; scales of spikelets 2-ranked (= in two distinct rows), the spikelets
± flattened or square; perianth bristles absent; achenes lenticular or trigonous.
AA genus of ca. 300 species of annual or perennial herbs of tropical and warm areas; some are
problematic weeds while others are cultivated as ornamentals. The commonly cultivated Old
World Cyperus papyrus L. (PAPYRUS, PAPER-REED) was used by the Egyptians to make paper at
least 5500 years ago; the Greek word for the plant was papyros from which our word paper is
derived (Hepper 1992); this species was also used to make sandals, ropes, and boats (e.g., Moses
in the bulrushes); the Greek word byblos was the name for the white pith of PAPYRUS used in
making paper (the pith was cut into strips, glued together, and then pressed and dried—Zohary
1982); the word byblosbecame modified into biblion and was applied to all scrolls or books and
eventually to the Bible (Hepper 1992). Cyperus is a taxonomically difficult genus with a num-
ber of taxa apparently hybridizing and intergrading morphologically. Intermediates (geneti-
cally contaminated individuals) between C. croceus, C. echinatus, C. retroflexus,and C. retrorsus
are frequently seen. Similar problems occur within other complexes. (Cypeiros, the ancient
Greek name)
REFERENCES: McGivney 1938, 1941a, 1941b; Corcoran 1941; Marcks 1972, 1974; Baijanth 1975;
                                                                                           CYPERUS/CYPERACEAE 1133

Denton 1978; Tucker 1983, 1994; Carter 1984; Carr 1988; Carter & Kral 1990; Schippers et al.
1995; Jones et al. 1996; Carter & Jones 1997.

1. Achenes lenticular (= lens-shaped); styles 2-branched.
   2. Spikelets with only 2 scales (plus 2 minute, brownish, basal scales much smaller than regular
      scales); achene 1 per spikelet; inflorescences 3–8(–12) mm long                                           see Kyllinga
   2. Spikelets with 6 or more scales; achenes several per spikelet; inflorescences variable, often
      much larger.
      3. Spikelets mostly 1.0–1.9 mm wide, sharp-pointed; achenes 0.4–0.5 mm wide, narrowly ob-
         long to oblong                                                                                     C. polystachyos
      3. Spikelets mostly more than 2.0 mm wide, subacute to obtuse, not sharp-pointed;
         achenes 0.6–0.7 mm wide, usually obovoid, often nearly as broad as long.
         4. Achenes brown to grayish at maturity, with isodiametric cells, not transversely lined,
             distinctly apiculate apically; rare if present in nc TX                                         C. lanceolatus
         4. Achenes black at maturity, with longitudinally elongate cells, usually transversely lined,
             slightly apiculate apically; known from several counties in nc TX                                 C. flavescens
1. Achenes trigonous (= 3-angled); styles 3-branched.
   5. Spikelet axis separating at maturity at the floret nodes                                                   C. odoratus
   5. Spikelet axis remaining intact or apparently so, the florets either falling separately from the
      persistent axis OR the entire axis falling as a unit (OR whether unclear in immature C. odoratus).
      6. Culms with conspicuous septa (= internal partitions, but visible externally) at intervals of
         5–50 mm; leaves usually reduced to just a sheath (bladeless or blades to 2 cm long), the culms
         thus appearing nearly leafless                                                                        C. articulatus
      6. Culms nonseptate; leaf blades usually present and conspicuous (reduced in C. haspan and
         C. involucratus), the culms thus usually appearing leafy.
         7. Scales with strongly recurved (= curved backwards) long acuminate tips; plants with a
             persistent spice-like odor; scales 7–9 nerved; plants annual, usually 20 cm or less tall
                                                                                                              C. squarrosus
         7. Scales usually incurved to essentially straight or curved back but without long tips; plants
             usually without a spice-like odor; scales 3–5 nerved; plants perennial OR annual in case
             of C. compressus, C. difformis, C. erythrorhizos, and sometimes C. odoratus; plants of various
             heights, often much more than 20 cm tall.
             8. Culms rough to the touch, sparsely to densely covered with microscopic retrorse
                (= down pointing) or antrorse (= up pointing) teeth.
                9. Spikelets usually stalked, in loose heads, the heads usually clustered together; lower
                   spiklets neither markedly reflexed nor parallel to the peduncle; culms with retrorse
                   teeth; largest scales usually 1.1–1.5 mm long; stamen 1; achenes 0.7–0.8 mm long
                                                                                                           C. surinamensis
                9. Spikelets sessile, in dense ovoid heads occurring singly at the ends of elongate pe-
                   duncles, the peduncles 2–16 cm long; lower spikelets markedly reflexed and ± par-
                   allel to the peduncle (appearing to droop around the peduncle); culms with antrorse
                   teeth; scales usually 4–6 mm long; stamens 3; achenes 2.5–3.0 mm long                       C. plukenetii
             8. Culms smooth to the touch, rarely with a few horizontal knobs.
                10. Scales usually slightly to strongly curved outward at the tips (except in C. reflexus);
                     stamen 1; spikelet axis essentially wingless, persistent after scales and achenes have
                     fallen.
                     11. Leaves usually nodulose (= with knot-like septa visible under a hand lens); scales
                          essentially linear, conspicuously falcate (= sickle-shaped); achenes linear, 1–
                          1.3 mm long                                                                    C. pseudovegetus
                     11. Leaves not nodulose; scales ovate, weakly S-shaped OR curved at base but
                          straight at tip; achenes oblong to elliptic, 0.7–1.1(–1.2) mm long.
1134 CYPERACEAE/CYPERUS

                 12. Scales weakly S-shaped, the tips curving outward; plants tufted, without
                     rhizomes; widespread in nc TX                                                      C. acuminatus
                 12. Scales curved at base but straight at tip; plants often with short, scaly, creep-
                     ing rhizomes 1–3 mm thick; in nc TX known only from Denton Co.                         C. reflexus
         10. Scale tips not curving outward (but scales may be spreading); stamens usually 3;
             spikelet axis winged or wingless, persistent or whole spikelet falling as a unit.
             13. Most leaves reduced to mere bladeless sheaths or occasionally the uppermost
                 sheaths with short blades very rarely to 10 cm long.
                 14. Bracts usually 2, 1 of them 0.3–1(–2) times as long as the inflorescence,
                      usually < 13 cm long; culms 0.1–0.7 m tall; native species                             C. haspan
                 14. Bracts 10–25, often much surpassing the inflorescences, 15–40 cm long;
                      culms 0.3–1.5 m tall; escaped cultivar                                           C. involucratus
             13. Even the lower leaves with well-developed blades.
                 15. Scales minute, < 1 mm long; rare in nc TX, known only from Williamson Co.
                                                                                                           C. difformis
                 15. Scales > 1 mm long; widespread in nc TX.
                     16. Scales 1.3–2.5(–3.2) mm long; achenes 0.7–1.5(–1.9) mm long; roots red-
                         dish OR not so; spikelets in rather loose elongate spikes, the spike axis
                         visible.
                         17. Roots usually reddish; scales small, 1.3–1.5 mm long; achenes 0.7–
                             0.8 mm long                                                             C. erythrorhizos
                         17. Roots not reddish; scales 1.5–2.5(–3.2) mm long; achenes (1–)1.2–
                             1.5(–1.9)mm long                                                              C. odoratus
                     16. Scales (2.3–)2.5–5.5 mm long; achenes 1–3 mm long; roots usually not
                         reddish; spikelets in rather loose elongate spikes as above OR in crowded
                         or extremely densely packed short compact heads with the inflores-
                         cence axis usually not visible.
                         18. Achenes 1–1.3 mm long, nearly as thick as long; spikelets 10–24 mm
                             long, 2–3.5(–4) mm wide, conspicuously flattened, digitately ar-
                             ranged (= all arising from about the same point on a very short
                             axis)                                                                     C. compressus
                         18. Achenes 1.3–3 mm long, much longer than thick; spikelets various,
                             flattened to angled or nearly rounded, pinnate or digitate in dense
                             heads or open spikes.
                              19. Spikelet axis essentially wingless; spikelets 3–16 mm long with
                                  scales 2.5–4.2 mm long, in crowded (but not extremely dense)
                                  heads or short spikes.
                                  20. Plants viscid (= sticky); leaves spongy at base, the dried
                                      leaves nodulose (= with knot-like septa visible with a hand
                                      lens) basally; longer peduncles branched into head-bear-
                                      ing secondary peduncles                                               C. elegans
                                  20. Plants nonviscid; leaves neither spongy nor nonseptate
                                      basally; secondary peduncles usually absent.
                                      21. Inflorescence usually a single nearly spherical head 1–
                                           3 cm long (sometimes with a few peduncles bearing
                                           small heads); main head with 15–55 spikelets; widely
                                           scattered in nc TX                                              C. lupulinus
                                      21. Inflorescence 3–10 cm long, of 4–8 peduncles, each
                                           bearing short spikes 1–2 cm long; spikes with 5–18
                                           spikelets each; rare if present in nc TX                    C. schweinitzii
                                                         CYPERUS/CYPERACEAE 1135

19. Spikelet axis winged; spikelets, scales, and inflorescences vari-
    ous, similar to above OR quite different.
    22. Lower spikelets markedly reflexed and appearing ± droop-
        ing around the peduncle; heads cylindric or obovoid; an-
        thers 1 mm or more long; rare in nc TX                             C. hystericinus
    22. Lower spikelets not markedly reflexed OR if somewhat re-
        flexed, then anthers < 1 mm long; heads various; anthers
        various, < 1 mm long in many species OR 1 mm or more
        long; widespread in nc TX.
        23. Plants rhizomatous perennials; anthers 1 mm or more
            in length; spikelet axis persistent.
            24. Bracts 3 or 4, about equaling inflorescence in length;
                  spikelets 3–9 per spike                                      C. rotundus
            24. Bracts 5–13, greatly exceeding inflorescence; spike-
                  lets 10–50 per spike.
                  25. Spikelets reddish brown; achenes 0.4–0.5 mm
                       thick; culms (60–) 75–110 cm tall                      C. setigerus
                  25. Spikelets brown to golden-brown; achenes 0.6-
                       0.8 mm thick; culms 15–50(–65) cm tall               C. esculentus
        23. Plants nonrhizomatous perennials; anthers less than 1
            mm long; spikelet axis deciduous at base.
            26. Spikelets usually 12–25 mm long, usually pinnately
                  arranged in often rather loose elongate spikes, the
                  spike axis visible                                           C. strigosus
            26. Spikelets 3.5–10 mm long, usually crowded or
                  extemely densely packed into short compact heads
                  (inflorescence axis usually not visible), digitately ar-
                  ranged or if slightly pinnate, then the heads ex-
                  tremely dense.
                 27. Inflorescences extremely densely cylindric or
                      subcylindric, usually less than 8(–10) mm broad;
                      spikelets so dense that outline of head is smooth
                                                                               C. retrorsus
                 27. Inflorescences neither densely cylindric nor
                      subcylindric, mostly > 8 mm in diam., extremely
                      densely globose or subglobose or spikelets
                      crowded in globose or subglobose heads; out-
                      line of head appearing somewhat rough or
                      smooth.
                      28. Inflorescences extremely densely globose or
                          subglobose with 100–250 spikelets per
                          head; spikelets so dense that outline of head
                          is smooth                                           C. echinatus
                      28. Inflorescences spherical, with spikelets
                          crowded (but not extremely densely), glo-
                          bose or subglobose with 10–70 spikelets per
                          head; outline of head appearing somewhat
                          rough.
                          29. Achenes concave in cross-section; larg-
                               est scales usually 3 mm or longer;
1136 CYPERACEAE/CYPERUS

                                                   achenes usually 1.7–2.5 mm long; plants
                                                   3–35(–60) cm tall; spikelet axis with
                                                   thickened and slightly discolored wings
                                                   clasping the achene                       C. retroflexus
                                               29. Achenes convex in cross-section; larg-
                                                   est scales usually 3 mm or less long;
                                                   achenes usually 1.7 mm or less long;
                                                   plants 10–80 cm tall; spikelet axis wings
                                                   neither discolored nor clasping the
                                                   achene                                        C. croceus

Cyperus acuminatus Torr. & Hook. ex Torr., (tapering at tip), TAPER-LEAF FLAT SEDGE. Tufted pe-
rennial 10–80 cm tall; culms slender; inflorescences usually compact; sheaths not nodulose;
blades 1–4 mm wide; scales weakly S-shaped, the tip with a slight to marked outward curve.
Moist areas; nearly throughout TX. Mostly May–Oct.

Cyperus articulatus L., (jointed), CHINTÚL, JOINTED FLAT SEDGE. Perennial 0.5–1.4 m tall with
creeping rhizomes, forming colonies; leaves few, basal, reduced to small essentially bladeless
sheaths; inflorescences essentially bractless or with very small bracts; spikelets 6–33(–45) mm
long. Moist grassland; se TX n to Comal and McLennan cos.; disjunct n to Grayson Co. (exten-
sive colony on edge of small tank on bluff near Red River). May–Oct. The rhizome has been
used medicinally (Burkhill 1985).

Cyperus compressus L., (flattened), POORLAND FLAT SEDGE. Tufted annual or occasionally a
short-lived perennial. Weed in shrubbery, black clay; Dallas Co.; mainly se and e TX. Oct.

Cyperus croceus Vahl, (saffron-colored, yellow), BALDWIN FLAT SEDGE. Tufted perennial 15–70
cm tall; heads or spikes 8–20 mm broad; spikelets 3–8 mm long; scales with green keel and red-
dish or yellow-brown sides. Sandy open areas; Grayson, Kaufman, and Tarrant cos., also Milam
Co. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); mainly e and se TX and Edwards Plateau. May–Oct. [C. globulosus
of authors, not Aubl.]

Cyperus difformis L., (of unusual or differing forms). Annual 10–50 cm tall; roots red; leaves 2–4
per culm, 1–4 mm wide; heads globose or lobulate; spikelets 4–8 mm long; scales roundish, ob-
tuse, very small, 0.5–0.8 mm long, green with brownish or purplish sides. Unshaded creek beds
in perennially wet mud in shallow water over limestone or dolomite, creek banks, lake shores,
other wet areas; Williamson Co. (Carr 1988); in TX otherwise known in Travis Co. (Carr 1988);
first collected in TX in 1981 and first reported by Carr (1988). Native of Eurasia. Lipscomb
(1980) discussed the distribution of C. difformisin North America. I

Cyperus echinatus (L.) A.W. Wood, (prickly), GLOBE FLAT SEDGE, CYLINDER FLAT SEDGE. Tufted
perennial 15–70 cm tall; heads or spikes globose or subglobose, 8–21 mm long, 8.5–18 broad, less
than 1/4 longer than broad. Sandy open areas; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. May–Oct. [C. ovularis (Michx.) Torr.]

Cyperus elegans L., (elegant), STICKY FLAT SEDGE. Tufted viscid (= sticky) perennial 25–80 cm tall;
dried leaves nodulose (= with knot-like septa visible with a hand lens) basally; spikelets mostly
in head-like clusters; longer peduncles branched into head-bearing secondary peduncles at
ends of branches. Damp soils; known in nc TX only from Erath Co. (West Cross Timbers);
mainly s TX. Jun.

Cyperus erythrorhizos Muhl., (red-rooted), RED-ROOT FLAT SEDGE. Tufted annual 0.5–1.4 m tall;
fresh roots usually reddish; inflorescences umbel-like; peduncles unequal; spikes several per
peduncle; internodes of spikes 0–0.5 mm long; scales relatively small, 1.3–1.5 mm long; achenes
                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1137




   Cyperus acuminatus [BT2]        Cyperus articulatus [CO1]                Cyperus compressus [BT 2]




   Cyperus croceus [BT2]


                                    Cyperus difformis [MAS]                  Cyperus echinatus [BT2]




Cyperus elegans [CO1]         Cyperus erythrorhizos [BT2]                    Cyperus esculentus [BA1]
1138 CYPERACEAE/CYPERUS

0.7–1 mm long. Marshy areas; se and e TX w to Grayson and Parker cos., also Edwards Plateau.
Jul–Dec.

Cyperus esculentus L., (edible), YELLOW NUT-GRASS, CHUFA, NORTHERN NUT-GRASS. Perennial, co-
lonial, 15–50 cm tall; rhizomes sometimes with tuber-like thickenings; anther connective pro-
longed into a red dot 0.05–0.1 mm long. Sandy disturbed soils; scattered nearly throughout TX.
Summer–fall. According to Mabberley (1987), native to w Asia and Africa and widely natural-
ized in New World; however, Tucker (1994) considered it to be cosmopolitan. [C. esculentus var.
leptostachyusBoeck., C. esculentus var. macrostachyus Boeck.] Schippers et al. (1995) discussed
infraspecific variation in this widespread species; it can be a troublesome weed infesting a vari-
ety of crops (Holm et al. 1977). Varieties are sometimes recognized (e.g., Jones et al. 1997). Ac-
cording to Crosswhite (1980), the nut-like, edible, tuber-like thickenings were used during pio-
neer days.

Cyperus flavescens L., (yellowish), YELLOW FLAT SEDGE. Tufted annual 10–25 cm tall; spikelets
(1.8–)2–3 mm wide; scales yellow-green to yellowish brown; achenes black, shiny, with rectan-
gular to linear (vertical) cells, the rows of cells marked by horizontal, wavy, usually discolored
sutures. Moist sand; Denton, Hamilton, and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX. Jul–Nov. [C.
flavescensvar. poaeformis (Pursh) Fernald]

Cyperus haspan L., (the native name in Ceylon), SHEATHED FLAT SEDGE. Tufted perennial 10–70
cm tall; most leaves reduced to bladeless sheaths or rarely with short blades. Moist places; near s
edge of nc TX in Burnet Co. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.) and expected in other parts of nc TX; e and
se TX and Central Mineral Region. Jun–Oct. This pantropical to warm temperate species can be
a pernicious weed.

Cyperus hystricinus Fernald, (porcupine-like, bristly). Perennial to 1 m tall; rhizomes thick, to
1.5 cm long; leaf blades 4–6 mm wide; spikelets golden brown; lower spikelets markedly re-
flexed and appearing ± drooping around the peduncle. Xeric sandy soils; Henderson and Tar-
rant cos. (Tucker 1984); mainly se TX. Summer–fall. [C. retrofractus (L.) Torr. var. hystricinus
(Fernald) Kük.]

Cyperus involucratus Rottb., (with an involucre), UMBRELLA-PLANT, UMBRELLA FLAT SEDGE. Peren-
nial to 1.5 m tall; bracts very numerous (10–25) and very long (15–40 cm). Widely cultivated,
persists, and spreads; Tarrant Co. Summer–fall. Native of Old World, probably Africa or Mada-
gascar. [C. alternifolius of authors, not L., C. alternifolius L. subsp. flabelliformis(Rottb.) Kük., C.
flabelliformis Rottb.] Baijnath (1975) discussed nomenclature for this species. I

Cyperus lanceolatus Poir., (lanceolate, lance-shaped). Tufted or mat-forming perennial 5–50 cm
tall; spikelets straw-colored or sometimes with an olivaceous tinge, but without darker splotch.
Included based on citation of vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990) but possibly not
present in nc TX (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); also Central Mineral Region just s of nc TX (Correll &
Johnston 1970). Sep. [C. lanceolatus var. compositusJ. Presl & C. Presl]

Cyperus lupulinus (Spreng.) Marcks, (resembling Humulus lupulus—hops), SLENDER FLAT SEDGE.
Tufted perennial 15–50 cm tall, with hard swollen culm bases, often developing short knotty
rhizomes; inflorescences typically of a single nearly spherical head or sometimes with a few
peduncles bearing small heads; spikelets gray-green. Sandy open woods; Grayson, Kaufman,
and Tarrant cos.; widely scattered in TX. May–Jun, occasionally to Sep. [C. filiculmis of authors,
not Vahl—Marks 1974]

Cyperus odoratus L., (fragrant), FRAGRANT FLAT SEDGE. Tufted annual or perennial 5–60 cm tall;
spikelets at maturity dull reddish to brownish; spikelet axis separating at maturity at the floret
nodes (because this is not always evident in young material, C. odoratus can also be reached in
                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1139




 Cyperus flavescens [BT2]                       Cyperus haspan [ GWO]                  Cyperus hystricinus [BB2]




                    Cyperus involucratus [BA1, BR2]                                    Cyperus lanceolatus [HEA]




Cyperus lupulinus [BT 2]                       Cyperus odoratus [BT2]                  Cyperus plukenetii [BT2]
1140 CYPERACEAE/CYPERUS

the key without recognizing this character); scales relatively small, 1.5–2.5 mm long; achenes (1–)
1.2–1.5(–1.9) mm long. Stream banks or moist areas; abundant in all parts of TX. Jun–Oct. [C.
engelmannii Steud., C. ferruginescensBoeck., C. odoratus var. engelmannii (Steud.) R. Carter, S.D.
Jones, & Wipff, C. odoratus var. squarrosus (Britt.) S.D. Jones, J. Wipff, and R. Carter] This is one
of the most common Cyperus species in nc TX. It is often treated as a single variable species
(Correll & Johnston 1970; Kartesz 1994; Tucker 1994); Tucker (1983, 1987) for example, indicated
that there was not a single consistent character separating C. engelmannii from C. odoratus and
that the two intergrade extensively. Correll and Johnston (1970) indicated concerning C.
odoratus that “… it is impossible to distinguish segregate taxa.” Given that the varieties overlap
morphologically and are mostly sympatric, treatment as a variable species without infraspe-
cific taxa is possibly best. Jones et al. (1996), however, recognized the following three varieties
indicating that “We find these three taxa closely related and mostly sympatric, but discrete. Al-
though some intermediates exist, they are relatively few. Considering their distinct morpholo-
gies, we believe that varietal rank under C. odoratus is warranted. …” The following key is from
Jones et al. (1996) modified from O’Neill (1940).

1. Scales near the middle of the spikelet (2.7–)2.8–3.2 mm long; rachilla wings reaching or covering
   the shoulders of the achene; achenes (1.2–)1.3–1.5 mm long, (0.5–)0.6–0.7 mm wide; spikelets
   brownish                                                                                               var. odoratus
1. Scales near the middle of the spikelet (2–)2.3–2.5(–2.6) mm long; rachilla wings rarely reaching
   and never covering the shoulders of the achene; achenes 0.8–1(–1.1) mm long, (0.3–)0.4–0.5
   mm wide; spikelets reddish.
   2. Tip of scale reaching only to base of the scale next above and on the same side of the rachis
                                                                                                       var. engelmannii
  2. Tip of scale conspicuously reaching over the base of the scale next above on the same side of
     the rachis                                                                                          var. squarrosus


Cyperus plukenetii Fernald, (for Leonard Plukenet, 1642–1704, one of the original describers
and illustrators of American plants). Tufted perennial 30–100 cm tall; culm bases hard, swollen,
sometimes developing short knotty rhizomes; culms rough to the touch, with minute antrorse
teeth; lower spikelets appearing to droop around the peduncle. Sandy woods; Henderson and
Limestone cos., also Dallas Co. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); se and e TX w to e Blackland Prairie.
Jun–Sep.

Cyperus polystachyos Rottb., (many-spiked). Tufted perennial; culms ca. 3–35 cm long; inflores-
cences variable, with 1–8(–12) main peduncles terminated by clusters of spikelets or clusters
sometimes sessile or sometimes inflorescences secondarily branched; spikelets sessile to short-
stalked, sometimes diverging ± at right angles from the axis, sometimes ± strongly ascending.
Stream banks, moist sand; Hopkins and Limestone cos. on e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e
TX. Spring–fall. [C. polystachyosRottb. var. texensis (Torr.) Fernald] We are following Jones et al.
(1997) in lumping var. texensis.

Cyperus pseudovegetus Steud., (false vigorous). Tufted perennial; inflorescenes usually with 3–
10 main peduncles terminated by head-like clusters of spikelets, sometimes secondarily
branched; spikelets small, 2.5–4 mm long; scales essentially linear, conspicuously sickle-
shaped, when spread out 0.6–0.7 mm wide; leaves usually with knot-like septa visible under a
hand lens; achenes linear, 1.0–1.3 mm long, maturing brownish. Sandy soils; se and e TX w to
Grayson and Parker cos. Jun–Oct. [C. virens Michx. var. arenicola (Boeck.) Shinners]

Cyperus reflexus Vahl, (bent back), BENT-AWN FLAT SEDGE. Perennial with creeping rhizomes,
similar to C. acuminatus (which however, has S-shaped scales) and C. pseudovegetus(which
however, has much narrower scales); scales ca. 1.1 mm wide when spread out, often reddish
                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1141




Cyperus polystachyos [GWO]          Cyperus pseudovegetus [BT2]                  Cyperus reflexus [CUM]




      Cyperus retroflexus [ BT 2]          Cyperus retrorsus [CO 1]             Cyperus rotundus [BT2]




      Cyperus schweinitzii [BB2]           Cyperus setigerus [GLE ]                 Cyperus squarrosus [BT2]
1142 CYPERACEAE/CYPERUS

with greenish keels, straight at base but curved at tip; achenes pale brown, 0.9–1.2 mm long.
Moist sand; Denton Co., also Bell and Henderson cos. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); mostly se and e
TX, also Edwards Plateau. Spring–summer. [C. reflexus var. fraternus (Kunth) Kuntze]

Cyperus retroflexus Buckley, (reflexed), ONE-FLOWER FLAT SEDGE. Tufted perennial usually 3–
35(–60) cm tall; scales at maturity often deep red-brown with prominent green keel. Sandy
open woods or prairies; throughout TX. May–Oct. [C. retroflexus var. pumilus (Britt.) R. Carter &
S.D. Jones, C. uniflorus Torr. & Hook., not Thunb., C. uniflorus var. pumilus Britt., C. uniflorus
var. retroflexus (Buckley) Kük.] Infraspecific taxa are often not recognized in this species (e.g.,
O’Neill 1942; Kartesz 1994; Tucker 1994) and given the extensive overlap in morphological
characters between the varieties and the lack of geographical isolation, treatment as a variable
species without infraspecific taxa is possibly best. However, the following varieties were recog-
nized by Carter and Jones (1997). They indicated that despite “overlap in virtually every charac-
teristic we examined,” when combinations of characteristics were used, most specimens could
be identified to variety. According to S.D. Jones (pers. comm.), both varieties occur throughout
nc TX, but var. retroflexus is by far the most common. The following key is from Carter and
Jones (1997).

1. Fertile floral scales 1.9–3.0(–3.3) mm long; rachilla wing usually membranaceous throughout;
   rachilla usually lacking lateral nerves; longest spikelets 2.2–5.8(–8) mm long; terminal sterile flo-
   ral scale of spikelet often much reduced, less than 2/3 the length of fertile floral scales; longest
   peduncle less than 2.7(–3.9) cm long; plants diminutive, 3–35(–45) cm tall                                var. pumilus
1. Fertile floral scales (2.8–)3.0–3.9 mm long; rachilla wing usually chartaceous beyond clasped
   achene angle, border membranaceous; rachilla usually with two lateral nerves, one along each
   side of median; longest spikelets 4.9–9(–11.3) mm long; terminal sterile floral scale usually not
   greatly reduced, 2/3 or more the length of fertile floral scales; longest peduncle (0.5–)2.4–6.8 cm
   long; except for depauperate specimens, plants usually greater than 25(–57) cm tall                     var. retroflexus

Cyperus retrorsus Chapm., (twisted or turned backward). Tufted perennial; spikes extremely
densely cylindric or subcylindric, 6–8(–10) mm broad by 7–18 mm long, more than 1/4 longer
than broad. Ditches, roadsides, open woods, usually in sandy soils; se and e TX w to West Cross
Timbers. Jun–Oct. Because of indistinct boundaries even between species within this complex,
we are not recognizing infraspecific taxa within C. retrorsus. [C. ovularis (Michx.) Torr. var.
cylindricus (Elliott) Torr., C. globulosusAubl. var. robustus (Boeck.) Shinners]

Cyperus rotundus L., (round), NUT-GRASS, NUT SEDGE, COCO-GRASS, PURPLE NUT-GRASS. Deeply rhi-
zomatous perennial 7–50 cm tall, forming colonies; rhizomes at intervals with tube-like thick-
enings; each cluster of inflorescence with 2–12 spikelets; spikelets 4–40 mm long, dark red-
brown to purplish. Disturbed waste or lawn areas; widespread in TX. May–Oct. Native of the
Old World. Often a pernicious weed and sometimes referred to as “the world’s worst weed”
(Mabberley 1987). I

Cyperus schweinitzii Torr., (for its discoverer, Lewis David von Schweinitz, 1780–1834, German-
born Pennsylvania clergyman and student of fungi), SCHWEINITZ’ FLAT SEDGE. Tufted perennial
15–45(–80) cm tall; achenes dark-brown. Deep sands; included based on citation of vegetational
area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); also Plains Country and Trans-Pecos (Correll & Johnston 1970).
Spring and summer. According to S.D. Jones (pers. comm.), this species does not occur in nc TX.

Cyperus setigerus Torr. & Hook., (bearing bristles). Perennial 40–110 cm tall with shallow creep-
ing rhizomes, forming small colonies; spikelets reddish brown. Stream or pond banks, low ar-
eas; widespread in TX. May–Sep.

Cyperus squarrosus L., (with recurved tips), BEARDED FLAT SEDGE. Tufted annuals 1–20 cm tall,
with persistent odor, like coffee-and-chicory or curry powder; inflorescences of 1–3 heads, es-
                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1143




      Cyperus strigosus [BT2]      Cyperus surinamensis [BT2]                 Eleocharis acicularis [BT2]




Eleocharis acutisquamata [RHO]                            Eleocharis baldwinii [GWO]




      Eleocharis cellulosa [GWO]   Eleocharis compressa [BT2]                 Eleocharis engelmannii [ABR]
1144 CYPERACEAE/ELEOCHARIS

sentially sessile; scale tips prominently recurved. Disturbed soils, sand; Bell, Bosque, Dallas,
Grayson, Hood, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; nearly throughout TX. Jun–Jul. [C. aristatus Rottb.]

Cyperus strigosus L., (strigose, with straight appressed hairs bent at base), FALSE NUT-GRASS.
Tufted perennial 10–110 cm tall, without rhizomes; spikelets usually pinnately arranged in of-
ten rather loose elongate spikes, the spike axis visible; scales 3.75–4.5 mm long. Low sandy soils;
e 1/2 of TX. Jun–Oct.

Cyperus surinamensis Rottb., (of Surinam), TROPICAL FLAT SEDGE. Tufted perennial, short-lived,
flowering first year, 10–40(–80) cm tall; culms rough to the touch, with minute retrorse teeth.
Low moist areas; Grayson and Tarrant cos., also Dallas Co. (Lipscomb 1978a), also Williamson
Co. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); s and se TX n to nc and e TX. Jul–Nov.

Cyperus bipartitus Torr., (two-parted), is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig.
2) but apparently occurs only to the s and e of nc TX. This species can be distinguished from
the similar C. flavescensas follows: scales yellow with large blotches of chestnut or purplish
brown, rarely entirely purplish. [C. rivularis Kunth, C. niger Ruiz & Pavon var. rivularis (Kunth)
V.E. Grant]

Cyperus digitatus Roxb., (finger- or hand-like) FINGER FLAT SEDGE, is cited by Hatch et al. (1990)
for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) but apparently occurs only to the s and e of nc TX. It differs from
C. erythrorhizos as follows: internodes of spikes 0.6–2 mm long; scales 1.5–2 mm long.

Cyperus ochraceus Vahl, (ochre-colored), is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4
(Fig. 2) but apparently occurs only to the s and e of nc TX. This species can be distinguished
from C. pseudovegetusand C. reflexus as follows: scales broader when spread out, 1.5–1.9 mm
wide; achenes maturing nearly black, 1.3–1.5 mm long.

                                        ELEOCHARIS SPIKE-RUSH
Culms (= stems) green and glabrous, flat, round, or angled, with leaf sheaths present on basal
part; leaf blades absent; inflorescence a single terminal spikelet at the end of a usually elongate
culm (hence name SPIKE-RUSH); scales of spikelets spirally arranged (± 2-ranked in 1 species—E.
baldwinii); perianth of bristles or absent; achenes with a tubercule (= hardened persistent
style).
AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 120 species; E. dulcis (Burm. f.) Hensch. (WATER-CHESTNUT), na-
tive to the Old World tropics, is often used in Chinese cuisine. (Greek: elos, marsh, and charis,
grace; many species being marsh plants)
REFERENCES: Fernald & Brackett 1929; Svenson 1929, 1939, 1953, 1957; Drapalik & Mohlenbrock
1960; Harms 1968, 1972; González-Elizondo & Peterson 1997.

1. Scales of spikelets with long-pointed scarious tip (often split in two).
   2. Culms usually several-angled or -ribbed, not strongly flattened, 0.3–0.8 mm wide; widespread
      in nc TX                                                                                         E.. acutisquamata
   2. Culms strongly flattened, to 1.5 mm wide; apparently erroneously reported for nc TX, ques-
      tionably present in deep e TX                                                                          E.. compressa
1. Scales of spikelets with rounded or broadly short-pointed tip (sometimes split).
   3. Spikelets tiny, 1–2 mm thick in flower excluding styles or stamens, 2–7 mm long, with 2–15
      scales; culms thread-like.
      4. Scales ± 2-ranked, the spikelets flattish; tubercle ca. 1/3 or more the length of the
         achene body; rare, known locally only from e margin of nc TX                                          E. baldwinii
      4. Scales spirally arranged, the spikelets not flattish; tubercle smaller (1/4 or less the length of
         the achene body) or not distinct; widespread in nc TX.
                                                                                       ELEOCHARIS/CYPERACEAE 1145

      5. Achene body with 6–9 ribs or ridges running lengthwise with fine perpendicular lines
         between ribs                                                                                          E. acicularis
      5. Achene body smooth, without ribs, ridges, or lines.
         6. Tubercle not differentiated from achene body, blending into achene body so that
            the junction is not visible (appearing as though tubercle not present); achene
            body gray to black at maturity, 0.8–1.5 mm long; widespread in nc TX                                  E. parvula
         6. Tubercle constricted basally, well-differentiated from achene body, the junction
            with achene body clearly visible; achene body pearly white to pale greenish gray, 0.5–
            0.6 mm long; rare, known in nc TX only from Lamar Co. in Red River drainage                    E. microcarpa
3. Spikelets 1.8–5 mm thick in flower, 3–25 mm or more long, with (3–)15–90 or more scales;
   culms coarsely thread-like, wiry, or thick.
   7. Culms 2–5 mm wide; spikelets of roughly the same diam. at the supporting culm.
      8. Culms conspicuously quadrangular (= square in cross-section)                                 E.. quadrangulata
      8. Culms not quadrangular.
         9. Culms strongly flattened to ± rounded, 0.9–3 mm wide; spikelets 8–25 mm long; scales
            usually acute; styles 2-branched; body of achenes 1.2–1.8 mm long, the tubercle basally
            constricted, distinct from the achene body, the junction between the 2 clear                        E.. palustris
         9. Culms ± rounded, 2–5 mm wide; spikelets 19–36(–50) mm long; scales obtuse;
            styles 3-branched; body of achenes ca. 2 mm long, the tubercle ± appearing as a con-
            tinuation of the achene body, not at all constricted basally                                        E.. cellulosa
   7. Culms 2 mm or less wide; spikelets distinctly thicker than the supporting culm.
      10. Plants annuals with only fleshy-fibrous roots, pulled up easily.
           11. Scales definitely acute (= pointed); spikelets lanceolate, acuminate                          E.. lanceolata
           11. Scales obtuse; spikelets lanceolate to broadly ovoid to ovoid-cylindric, acute to
               obtuse.
               12. Tubercle (= hardened persistent style) much narrower than summit of achene
                   body, 0.1–0.2 mm wide, somewhat constricted basally and thus slightly sepa-
                   rated from achene body, light-colored; styles 2-branched                                  E.. geniculata
               12. Tubercle nearly as broad as summit of achene body, 0.5–1 mm wide, in outline
                   merging with achene body, dark-colored; styles 2- or 3-branched.
                   13. Spikelets globose-ovoid or oblong-ovoid and obtuse, mostly 3–12 mm long;
                        bristles mostly surpassing the tubercule; tubercule 1/3–nearly 1/2 as high
                        as achene body                                                                             E.. obtusa
                   13. Spikelets mostly cylindrical and acute, usually 6.0–18.0 mm long; bristles
                        shorter than to barely reaching tip of tubercule; tubercle short, not more
                        than 1/4 as high as achene body                                                   E. engelmannii
      10. Plants perennials with rhizomes, often very difficult to pull up (and underground parts
           often lost).
           14. Plants often very small, 2–7(–12) cm tall; tubercle not differentiated from achene
               body, blending into achene body so that the junction is not visible (appearing as
               though tubercle not present); scales (and thus flowers) 3–8(–20) per spikelet                      E. parvula
           14. Plants usually much larger; tubercle well-differentiated from achene body, the junc-
               tion with achene body clearly visible; scales (and thus flowers) 15–90(–110) per spikelet.
               15. Spikelets longer, at least (8–)10 mm long in flower, to 25 mm long in age; scales
                   ± acute, 40–100 per spikelet; plants to 120 cm tall; achenes biconvex; style
                   branches 2                                                                                   E.. palustris
               15. Spikelets shorter, 3–9 mm long in flower, to 14 mm long in age; scales obtuse,
                   15–70(–110) per spikeket; plants 50 cm or less tall; achenes trigonous (in spe-
                   cies widespread in nc TX) OR biconvex (in species rare in nc TX); style branches
                   2 or 3.
1146 CYPERACEAE/ELEOCHARIS

                16. Achenes biconvex, reddish just before maturity, maturing to black or dark
                    purplish black; style branches 2; scales (and thus flowers) 15–25 per spikeket;
                    plant rare, in nc TX known only from Lampasas Co.                                E. flavescens
                16. Achenes trigonous, ripening through yellow to brown or dark brown; style
                    branches 3; scales (and thus flowers) 24–70(–110) per spikelet; plant wide-
                    spread in nc TX                                                              E. montevidensis

Eleocharis acicularis (L.) Roem. & Schult., (needle-shaped), REVERCHON’S SPIKE-RUSH, NEEDLE
SPIKE-RUSH. Small perennial 2–23 cm tall, often forming mats; spikelets with 5–15 scales (and
thus flowers), 2–5 mm long; achene body trigonous, 0.5–0.7 mm long, pearly white; tubercle
small. Damp soils; Dallas Co.; scattered in TX. May–Jun, sporadically to Oct. [E. reverchonii
Svenson]

Eleocharis acutisquamata Buckley, (with sharp-pointed, small, scale-like bracts or leaves),
SHARP-SCALE SPIKE-RUSH. Rhizomatous perennial, forming mats; rhizomes 2–4(–6) mm thick;
culms slender, 8–28 cm tall; spikelets 3–11 mm long, narrowly oblong or cylindric to narrowly
elliptic, with 24–44 scales; achene body trigonous, 0.9–1.2 mm long, yellow to golden-brown;
tubercle small. Pond margins or low areas of prairies, calcareous soils; mainly nc TX and
Edwards Plateau. Late Mar–May.

Eleocharis baldwinii (Torr.) Chapm., (for its discoverer, William Baldwin, 1779–1819, Pennsylva-
nia botanist and physician). Delicate tufted annual or perennial [?], stoloniferous, mat-forming;
culms thread-like, 3–20 cm tall; spikelets flattish, 2–7 mm long, with few (2–4(–10)) scales,
sometimes proliferating; cleistogamous spikelets often present at base of plant; scales of spike-
let ± 2-ranked, folded from the midrib and thus boat-like; achenes trigonous, with body ca. 0.5–
0–0.8 mm long, whitish buffy to olive, grayish olive, or brownish olive; tubercle conic-subulate,
0.2–0.3 mm long. Wet areas; Henderson Co., also Milam Co. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.). Summer–
fall. [E. capillacea of authors, not Kunth]

Eleocharis cellulosa Torr., (from the cellular surface of the achene), GULFCOAST SPIKE-RUSH .
Tufted perennial; culms erect to 80 cm tall; spikelets cylindric, to 1.9–3.6(–5) cm long and 3.5–5
mm thick, with many scales; achene body biconvex, ca. 2 mm long, light brown; tubercle not at
all basally constricted, appearing as a continuation of the achene body. Mud; Grayson Co., also
Burnet Co. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); also se TX and Edwards Plateau. Spring–fall.

Eleocharis compressa Sull., (flattened), COMPRESSED SPIKE-RUSH. Similar to E. acutisquamata; rhi-
zomatous perennial 9–20 cm tall, forming mats; spikelets 5–12 mm long, with 20–40 scales,
ovoid to narrowly ovoid; achene body trigonous, ca. 1 mm long, yellow to golden-brown; tu-
bercle small. Loamy usually moist soils; reported from Dallas by Svenson (Mahler 1988); e TX[?].
According to S.D. Jones (pers. comm.), E. compressa is a species to the e and n that apparently
does not reach TX; he indicated that TX material identified as E. compressa is actually E.
aqutisquamata. Brown and Marcus (1998) also did not find any TX material of E. compressaand
indicated that all specimens examined were referable to E. aqutisquamata.

Eleocharis engelmannii Steud., (for George Engelmann, 1809–1884, German-born botanist and
physician of St. Louis), ENGELMAN’S SPIKE-RUSH. Included based on citation of vegetational area
4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); not reported for other parts of TX. [E. obtusa var. detonsa (A.
Gray) Drapalik & Molenbrock; E. ovata (Roth) Roem. & Schult. var. engelmannii (Steud.)
Britton] This species has sometimes been lumped with E. obtusa (e.g., Mahler 1988).

Eleocharis flavescens (Poir.) Urb., (yellowish), PALE SPIKE-RUSH. Perennial by elongate rhizomes
0.5–1 mm thick, delicately mat forming; culms 4–35 mm tall; spikelets 3–6 mm long; achene
body biconvex, 0.6–1 mm long, reddish just before maturity, maturing to black or dark purplish
                                                                                     ELEOCHARIS/CYPERACEAE 1147

black; tubercle small. Wet areas; Lampasas Co. in Lampasas Cut Plain (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.);
mainly se and e TX and Edwards Plateau. Spring–fall. [E. flaccida (Rchb.) Urb.] Similar to and
can be confused with the annual E. geniculata (which has the summit of the leaf sheaths firm
and opaque versus thin-membranous and hyaline in E. flavescens).

Eleocharis geniculata (L.) Roem. & Schult., (jointed, bent like the knee), Tufted annual 4–40 cm
tall; spikelets 3–6 mm long, ovoid to broadly ovoid, usually of 28–50 scales; achene body bicon-
vex, 0.7–1 mm long, black or purplish black; tubercle small. Moist calcareous soils; in much of
TX. Summer and fall. [E. caribaea of authors, not (Rottb.) S.F. Blake]

Eleocharis lanceolata Fernald, (lanceolate, lance-shaped), LANCE-SPIKE SPIKE-RUSH. Tufted an-
nual 10–20 cm tall; spikelets with 30–80 scales; achene body biconvex, 0.9–1.1 mm long, brown-
ish; tubercle not basally constricted, merging in outline with achene body. Sandy soils; Grayson
(Correll & Johnston 1970) and Lamar (Carr 1994) cos.; also Bowie (Correll & Johnston 1970)
and Red River cos.; apparently very rare in TX. Summer. [E. obtusa (Willd.) Schult. var.
lanceolata (Fernald) Gilly]

Eleocharis microcarpa Torr., (small-fruited), SMALL-SEED SPIKE -RUSH. Tufted annual; culms
thread-like, 10–30 cm tall; spikelets 1.5–5 mm long, sometimes proliferous; achene body 0.5–0.6
mm long, pearly white to pale greenish gray; tubercle small. Wet areas; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994) in
Red River drainage; se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau and Rolling Plains. Spring–fall.

Eleocharis montevidensis Kunth, (presumably of Montevideo, Uruguay), Rhizomatous peren-
nial 10–50 cm tall; spikelets 3–14 mm long, variable in shape, with 24–70(–110) scales; scales
often dark brownish purple, obtuse; achene body trigonous, 0.8–1.2 mm long, yellow to golden-
brown; tubercle ± conic. Low ground, sandy or clay soils; nearly throughout TX. Late Mar–early
Jun. [E. arenicola Torr.]

Eleocharis obtusa (Willd.) Schult., (obtuse, blunt), BLUNT SPIKE-RUSH. Tufted annual 3–50 cm
tall; spikelets ca. 3–12 mm long, usually broadly ovoid to nearly cylindric, usually with 50–100
scales; achene body biconvex, 0.8–1.5 mm long, pale to dark brown; tubercle nearly as wide as
summit of achene. Moist sandy soils, pond margins; e TX w to Grayson and Tarrant cos.; also
Edwards Plateau. Late Apr–Oct.

Eleocharis palustris (L.) Roem. & Schult., (of marsh), LARGE-SPIKE SPIKE-RUSH, CREEPING SPIKE-
RUSH. Rhizomatous perennial 15–60 cm tall; culms round to strongly compressed; spikelets 8–
25 mm long, with 40–100 scales; achene body biconvex, usually more turgid on 1 side, 1.2–1.8
mm long, yellow to golden-brown; tubercle 0.3–0.7 mm long, basally constricted. Wet soils or
shallow water, sometimes extremely abundant; nearly throughout TX. May–Jun, sporadically
to Oct. [E. macrostachya Britton; E. xyridiformis Fernald & Brackett] The complex that has been
treated as E. palustris or E. macrostachya is quite confusing and is in need of taxonomic work.
We are following Kartesz (1994), Jones et al. (1997), and S.G. Smith (pers. comm.) in using the
name E. palustris. While one taxon, E. xyridiformis, is here lumped, another, E. erythropoda
Steud. [= E. calva Torr.], is possibly a good species. According to Taylor and Taylor (1994), E.
erythropoda is widely distributed in OK and while we have seen no specimens, it is therefore
likely present in nc TX. According to S.D. Jones (pers. comm.), E. erythropoda is present in the
Rolling Plains and along the TX-LA border. Galen Smith (pers. comm.) indicated that E.
erythropoda and E. palustris intergrade; the two can be distinguished as follows:

1. Culms round in cross-section or nearly so; sterile scale at base of spikelet only 1, this completely
   encircling the base of the spikelet; spikelets < 15 mm long; anthers 1.2–1.5mm long                    E. erythropoda
1. Culms strongly flattened to round in cross-section; sterile scales at base of spikelets 1–3, the
   lowest often not encircling the base of the spikelet; spikelets (8–)10–25 mm long; anthers
   1.6–2.1 mm long                                                                                           E. palustris
1148 CYPERACEAE/FIMBRISTYLIS


Eleocharis parvula (Roem. & Schult.) Link ex Bluff, Nees & Schauer, (very small), DWARF SPIKE-
RUSH. Plant often very small, 2–7(–12) cm tall; rhizomes or stolons short, plants forming mats in
mud; spikelets often very small, 2–5(–9) mm long; achene body trigonous, 0.8–1.5 mm long in-
cluding confluent tubercle, gray to black; tubercle scarcely recognizable as separate except un-
der high magnification. In mud; nearly throughout TX. Spring, fall. [E. parvula var. anachaeta
(Torr.) Svenson]

Eleocharis quadrangulata (Michx.) Roem. & Schult., (four-angled), SQUARE-STEM SPIKE-RUSH.
Coarse perennial; culms erect, to 80(–150) cm tall, distinctly 4-sided; spikelets cylindric, 20–42
mm long, with 40–90 scales; achene body biconvex, ca. 2 mm long, yellowish brown, reticulate;
tubercle longer than broad, constricted basally. Mud, lake margins; Grayson, Lamar, and Tar-
rant cos., also Denton Co. (G. Dick, pers. comm.) and Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez
1997); mainly e TX. Late spring–fall. [E. quadrangulata var. crassior Fernald]

                                                 FIMBRISTYLIS
Annuals or perennials; leaves filiform to linear; inflorescences of peduncled or sessile spikelets,
often subtended by a leafy involucre; scales of spikelets spirally imbricate; flowers perfect; peri-
anth none; stamens 1–3.
AA genus of ca. 150–250 species depending on circumscription; some species are used as cop-
per indicators or for their fiber; Bulbostylisis sometimes included. (Latin: fimbria, a fringe, and
Greek: stylos, pillar, column, or style, from the style being fringed with hairs in some species)
REFERENCES: Kral 1971; Kolstad 1986a.

1. Styles 3-branched; achenes trigonous or not; spikelets usually 2–7 mm long.
   2. Spikelets lanceolate to linear-oblong, usually 3–7 mm long, apically acute; scales of spikelets
      acute to acuminate; ligules of short hairs present; achenes trigonous, the surfaces not reticu-
      late or only faintly so, smooth or warty especially at base                                        F. autumnalis
   2. Spikelets usually ovoid to nearly round, 2–4 mm long, apically rounded; scales of spikelets
      obtuse; ligules absent; achenes not trigonous or only obscurely so, obovoid, the surfaces
      reticulate and usually warty                                                                           F. miliacea
1. Styles 2-branched; achenes lenticular to biconvex or obovoid; spikelets 3–10 mm long.
   3. Spikelets (at least 1 or more) peduncled; achenes 1 mm or more long; plants annual or peren-
      nial, to 1 m tall; leaves narrowly linear.
      4. Plants cespitose (= tufted or clumped) annuals; spikelet apex acute; achenes longitudinally
         and horizontally (less distinct) ribbed, often warty; ligules of short hairs present                   F. annua
      4. Plants perennials with culms solitary or a few together; spikelet apex obtuse to acute; achenes
         minutely reticulate, usually without either conspicuous ribs or warts; ligules inconspicuous
         to absent OR of short hairs                                                                        F. puberula
   3. Spikelets sessile, all close together in a capitate cluster; achenes ca. 0.5–0.7 mm long; plants
      low growing annuals to 15 cm tall; leaves filiform                                                         F. vahlii

Fimbristylis annua (All.) Roem. & Schult., (annual). Cespitose annual; culms decumbent, as-
cending, or erect, to 50 cm tall; leaves narrowly linear, 1–2(–4) mm wide; spikelets lance-ovoid
to ovoid to oblong, 3–8 mm long, apically acute; achenes 1–1.3 mm long. Weedy areas; Dallas
Co.; mainly e TX and Edwards Plateau. Oct. [F. baldwiniana (Schult.) Torr., Scirpus annuus All.]

Fimbristylis autumnalis (L.) Roem. & Schult., (autumnal, of the fall), SLENDER FIMBRISTYLIS.
Cespitose annual, 5–20 cm tall; leaves linear, to 4 mm wide; achenes ca. 1 mm long. Moist or wet,
often sandy areas; e TX w to West Cross Timbers; also Edwards Plateau. (Jun–)Jul–Nov. [Scirpus
autumnalis L.]
                                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1149




                              Eleocharis flavescens [GWO]                                            Eleocharis geniculata [GWO ]




Eleocharis lanceolata [BT2]                      Eleocharis microcarpa [GWO]                  Eleocharis montevidensis [GWO]




    Eleocharis obtusa [BT2]                         Eleocharis palustris [BT2]                      Eleocharis parvula [BT2]
1150 CYPERACEAE/FUIRENA

Fimbristylis miliacea (L.) Vahl, (resembling Milium—millet), GLOBE FIMBRISTYLIS. Cespitose an-
nual to 50(–100) cm tall; achenes ca. 1 mm long. Sandy areas; Delta, Lamar, Hopkins, and Red
River cos. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); mainly e TX. Aug.–Oct. Native of Asia. [Scirpus miliaceus L.]
Kral (1971) indicated, “The history of introduction of this weed into the U.S.A. probably paral-
lels that of rice, in that it is a common species of the rice growing countries of the Orient.” I

Fimbristylis puberula (Michx.) Vahl, (somewhat pubescent). Glabrous perennial 15–60(–100)
cm tall; culms solitary or in small tufts; leaves basal; inflorescences umbel-like; spikelets ±
ovoid; achenes to 1.8 mm long. Sandy prairies, open woods, often in wet areas. The following key
to varieties is modified from Kral (1971) and Kolstad (1986a).

1. Base of culms rarely bulbous, producing fascicles of slender orangish rhizomes; old leaf bases
   not persisting as shreddy remnants; outer surface of fertile scales seldom with any puberulence;
   longest bract of inflorescence usually longer than the inflorescence; ligules inconspicuous or
   often of short ascending hairs                                                                          var. interior
1. Base of culms bulbous, often jointed together into a stout, knotty rhizome; old leaf bases often
   persisting as shreddy remnants; outer surface of fertile scales usually with some puberulence;
   longest bract of inflorescence usually much shorter than inflorescence; ligules inconspicuous
   to absent                                                                                              var. puberula

var. interior (Britton) Kral. According to S.D. Jones (pers. comm.), there is a specimen (Hamilton
Co.) at TAES; Kral (1971) mapped the species to the s and w of nc TX; mainly Edwards Plateau
and Trans-Pecos. Early summer–summer. [F. interior Britton]

var. puberula. Se and e TX w to Grand Prairie, also Edwards Plateau. This is the common variety
in nc TX. Apr–Jul (usually finished flowering by early summer). [F. drummondii (Torr. & Hook.
ex Torr.) Boeck., Scirpus puberulus Michx.]

Fimbristylis vahlii (Lam.) Link, (for Martin Hendriksen Vahl, 1749–1804, Danish botanist and
student of Linnaeus), VAHL’S FIMBRISTYLIS. Leaves filiform, < 1 mm wide; spikelets lance-ovoid to
linear-ellipsoid or oblong-cylindric, apically obtuse or acute. Usually along lake margins,
streams, or in disturbed bottomlands; e TX w to Bell, McLennan, and Wise cos., also Edwards
Plateau. Jul–Oct. [Scirpus vahlii (Lam.) Link]

                                     FUIRENA UMBRELLA-GRASS
Perennials or annuals to 1 m tall; culms (= stems) obtusely triangular to nearly round; inflores-
cences condensed, often head-like, of 1–10 ovoid spikelets; scales of spikelets numerous, spirally
imbricate, usually with a very conspicuous, often recurved, bristle-like awn; perianth of 3 stalked,
scale-like or paddle-like structures often thickened, expanded, or swollen at maturity, often
also 3 perianth bristles alternating with the stalked structures; achenes strongly 3-angled.
AA genus of 30 species of warm areas. In the past, some authors lumped Fuirena into Scirpus.
(Named for Georg Fuiren, 1581–1628, a Danish botanist)
REFERENCES: Coville 1890; Bush 1905; Svenson 1957; Kral 1978.

1. Upper leaf sheaths with obvious pubescence; scale-like perianth parts (look under scales of spike-
   lets) without a subapical bristle, the apex either conic and swollen or acuminate; rhizomes pro-
   ducing corm-like shoot buds; only near e margin of nc TX.
   2. Scale-like perianth parts with apex thinnish or thickened, acuminate, incurved; bristles of peri-
      anth retrorsely barbellate; anthers 1.3 mm or less long; swollen cormous buds of rhizome not
      separated by narrower internodes                                                                    F. squarrosa
   2. Scale-like perianth parts swollen at maturity, narrowing to the conic and erect, sometimes
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1151




Eleocharis quadrangulata [BT2]                                                       Fimbristylis autumnalis [SID]


                                         Fimbristylis annua [SID]




                                                                              Fimbristylis puberula var. puberula [SID]


   Fimbristylis miliacea [SID]




                                  Fimbristylis puberula var. interior [SID]




      Fimbristylis vahlii [SID]                                                         Fuirena bushii [SID]
1152 CYPERACEAE/ISOLEPIS

      apiculate apex; bristles of perianth smooth; anthers ca. 2 mm long; swollen cormous buds of
      rhizome often separated by narrow internodes longer than corm width                                    F. bushii
1. Upper leaf sheaths glabrous; scale-like perianth parts usually with a subapical bristle, the apex
   flattish or notched or turgid and conic; rhizomes simple, lacking corm-like shoot buds; widespread
   in nc TX                                                                                                F. simplex
                                                                                                                    x

Fuirena bushii Kral, (for its discoverer, Benjamin Franklin Bush, 1858–1937, postmaster in MO
and amateur botanist). Plant to 1 m tall; leaf sheaths strongly hirsute; leaf blades with pubes-
cence; bristles of perianth reaching base of blades of stalked, scale-like perianth parts. Wet,
acidic, usually sandy areas; Lamar Co. (BRCH) in Red River drainage; mainly se TX. Jun–Oct. [F.
ciliata Bush]

Fuirena simplex Vahl, (unbranched), UMBRELLA SEDGE, WESTERN UMBRELLA-GRASS. Plant 0.1–1 m
tall; leaf sheaths glabrous or only the lowest hirsute; leaf blades minutely scabrous or glabrous;
bristles of perianth reaching at least base of blade of stalked, scale-like perianth part, retrorsely
(downwardly) barbed. Aquatic or wet places. Jun–Oct. This is a widespread variable species and
is by far the most common species in nc TX. Kral (1978) distinguished two varieties as follows:

1. Plants nonrhizomatous, mostly annual; anthers 0.5–0.6 mm long                                        var. aristulata
1. Plants rhizomatous, perennial; anthers 0.9–1.2 mm long                                                 var. simplex

var. aristulata (Torr.) Kral, (bearded or awned). Widespread in TX. [F. squarrosa Michx. var.
aristulata Torr.]

var. simplex. Widespread in TX.

Fuirena squarrosa Michx., (with recurved tips). Plant to 1 m tall, usually less; leaf sheaths
strongly hispid-hirsute; leaf blades with pubescence; bristles of perianth often reaching middle
of blade of stalked scale-like perianth parts. Wet areas, often on sandy substrates; Limestone
Co., also Milam Co. (BRCH); mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau and Panhandle. Jun–Oct.
[F. hispida Elliott]

Fuirena breviseta (Coville) Coville, (short-bristled), is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegeta-
tional area 4 (Fig. 2). Kral’s (1978) range map, however, showed all localities of F. breviseta to be
well e and s of nc TX. It can be distinguished by its short perianth bristles, these not reaching
the base of the blades of the stalked, scale-like perianth parts; the bristles are also without
barbs or weakly, usually upwardly barbed (vs. markedly downwardly barbed in the 3 other nc
TX species).

                                           ISOLEPIS BULRUSH
Small tufted annuals 2–25(–30) cm tall, glabrous or nearly so; leaves setaceous, near base of culms;
inflorescences of 1–3 sessile spikelets, appearing lateral, with a single, erect, modified leaf (= in-
volucral bract) appearing like a continuation of the culm; flowers (7–)10–30 per spikelet; scales
of spikelets keeled, awnless or very short-awned; perianth absent; stigmas 3; achenes trigonous,
minutely papillose (this can sometimes be obscured by a whitish, wax-like, surface layer).
AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 70 species (Smith 1997b), mostly of temperate and subtropical
climates; when tropical, restricted to mountains at higher elevations. Three species are reported
for TX (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.). Previously included in Scirpus (e.g., Kartesz 1994) and accord-
ing to some, better treated as a section or subgenus in Scirpus in the broad sense. We are follow-
ing Smith (1995, 1997b) and Jones et al. (1997) in recognizing this segregate of Scirpus at the ge-
neric level. Smith (1995) indicated that Isolepis and a number of other segregates of Scirpus will
be recognized in the forthcoming Cyperaceae treatment for Flora of North America (Vol. 11).
                                                                                       ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1153




                                                                           ACHENE, BRISTLES
                                                                                   &
                                                                           PERIANTH SCALES
Fuirena simplex var. aristulata [SID]
                                                    Fuirena simplex var. simplex [SID, TOR]                  Fuirena squarrosa [SID]




        Isolepis carinata [BT2, MAS]                                             Isolepis molesta [HEA]




                             Kyllinga brevifolia [BT 2]                                          Kyllinga pumila [GWO]
1154 CYPERACEAE/KYLLINGA

This approach is supported by the phylogenetic studies of Bruhl (1995) which suggested that
Scirpus sensu lato is polyphyletic. The key to species is modified from Smith (1997b). (Greek:
isos, equal, and lepis, scale)
REFERENCES: Beetle 1947; Johnston 1964; Smith 1995, 1997b; Smith & Yatskievych 1996.

1. Scales from middle of spikelet 1.8–2.0 mm long, short-awned (awns so short that the scales
   appear merely acuminate); achenes 1–1.5 mm long                                                   I. carinata
1. Scales from middle of spikelet 1–1.2 mm long, mucronate; achenes 0.7–0.9 mm long                  I. molesta

Isolepis carinata Hook. & Arn. ex Torr., (with a keel), ANNUAL BULRUSH. Tufted annual 4–25(–
30) cm tall; involucral bract 5–30 mm long; spikelets usually solitary, sometimes 2(–3), 2–10
mm long, 1.5–2 mm wide. Moist sandy soils; Fannin (Talbot property), Hood, Lamar, Navarro,
and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX; also Edwards Plateau. Spring. [I. koilolepis Steud., Scirpus
koilolepis (Steud.) Gleason]

Isolepis molesta (M.C. Johnston) S.G. Smith, (troublesome). Tufted annual 2–20 cm tall; involucral
bract 3–10(–25) mm long; spikelets 1–3, 2–8 mm long, 1-1.5 mm wide. Moist sandy soils; based
on range map in Smith (1997b), this species apparently occurs in the s part of nc TX; se and e
TX w to e part of c TX; it should be looked for in mixed populations with I. carinata . Spring.
[Scirpus molestusM.C. Johnston] Johnston (1964) indicated that while this species seems like a
dwarf form of I. carinata , clear-cut differences exist and no intermediate specimens are known.

                                                KYLLINGA
Small rhizomatous or tufted annuals or perennials to 21(–38) cm tall; inflorescence a single
roundish to 3-lobed congested head or head-like mass, 3–8(–12) mm long; spikelets flat, 1.8–4
mm long, with only a single, fertile, bisexual flower, deciduous as a unit, of only 4 scales, 2 of
these normal in size, the basal 2 minute, brownish; achene 1 per spikelet.
AA genus of ca. 40–45 species, mostly tropical with the greatest diversity in tropical Africa
and Madagascar; 8 occur in the New World (Tucker 1984). Kyllinga is sometimes included in
the genus Cyperus. (Named for P. Kylling, died 1696, Danish Botanist)
REFERENCES: Johnston 1966; Delahoussaye & Thieret 1967; Tucker 1984.

1. Rhizomatous perennials, the culms arising at intervals of 3–10 mm; stamen solitary; roundish
   inflorescences usually without any visible lobing                                               K. brevifolia
1. Densely tufted annuals with 4–20 culms per square cm; stamens paired; roundish inflorescences
   often slightly 3-lobed                                                                            K. pumila

Kyllinga brevifolia Rottb., (short-leaved), SHORT-LEAF FLAT SEDGE. Perennial with reddish rhi-
zomes to 20 cm long and 1–2 mm thick; culms to ca. 20(–38) cm tall; leaf blades usually 1–3(–
10) cm long, 1–4 mm wide; spikes 3–12 mm long; spikelets flat, 2.5–4 mm long. Moist loam; Dal-
las and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–Nov. [C. brevifolius (Rottb.)
Endl. ex Hassk.]

Kyllinga pumila Michx., (dwarf, very small), SLENDER-LEAF FLAT SEDGE. Tufted fragrant annual
to 21 cm tall; leaf blades 2–11 cm long, 1–1.8(–3) mm wide. Moist sites;
Denton Co., also Grayson Co. (Johnston 1966); mainly se and e TX. Sep–Nov. [C. tenuifolius
(Steud.) Dandy]

                                              LIPOCARPHA
Tufted, delicate, glabrous annuals 1–15 cm tall; leaves basal, 2, one without blade; inflorescence
of 1–3 ovoid, sessile, spikelet-like spikes 2–5(–8) mm long, the spikes of numerous single-flow-
ered spikelets whose scales (here called floral scales in contrast to the included hyaline scales)
                                                                                     LIPOCARPHA/CYPERACEAE 1155

are spirally and imbricately arranged to make the whole spike appear like a single spikelet; in
ours inside each floral scale there is 1 inconspicuous hyaline scale or bracteole often split and
torn by or adhering to the achene; floral scales with 0–3 prominent veins; inflorescence sub-
tended by 1–3 bracts, 1 of these much larger and appearing like a continuation of the culm, the
inflorescence thus appearing lateral; achenes narrowly oblong-obovate to obovate or ovate, 0.5–
0.8 mm long, granular, very minutely apiculate.
AA small, mainly tropical genus of 8 species with inflorescences and flowers much reduced;
possibly derived from Cyperus. The species treated here as Lipocarpha have historically been
segregated into the genus Hemicarpha. According to Friedland’s (1941) range map, at least two
and possibly three difficult to distinguish taxa are to be expected in nc TX. He recognized these
as varieties of Hemicarpa micrantha and said that in order to key them, “… the spikelet must be
boiled and then dissected under a binocular microscope capable of at least a magnification of
forty diameters.” Tucker (1987) and Kartesz (1994) recognized these taxa as species (Lipocarpha
aristulata (Coville) G.C. Tucker, L. drummondii (Nees) G.C. Tucker, and Lipocarpha micrantha
(Vahl) G.C. Tucker). While Friedland’s range map clearly showed L. aristulata and L.
drummondii in nc TX, the only specimens we have seen from nc TX are annotated L.
micrantha by Tucker. Using the key from Friedland (1941), we have been completely unable to
consistently distinguish the taxa; the following key was developed by S.D. Jones using TX mate-
rial. (Greek: lipos, fat, and carphos, chaff, from the thickness of the inner scales of some species)
REFERENCES: Friedland 1941; Svenson 1957; Tucker 1987.

1. Mid-upper floral scales of the spikelet mostly tapering into a conspicuous awn 1/4 to longer
   than the scale body; achenes obovate, maturing dark reddish brown to blackish; inner hyaline
   scale as long as or longer than the achene and cupped around it, veinless                                L. aristulata
1. Mid-upper floral scales of the spikelet acute-triangular apically, awnless, or, at most with a short
   mucro; achenes obovate or narrowly obovate, maturing brown to reddish brown, (but not as
   dark reddish brown to blackish as in L. aristulata); inner hyaline scale as long as the achene or
   longer and cupped around it OR shorter than the achene OR absent, if present, then 3–5-veined.
   2. Apices of floral scales incurved over top of the achenes; achenes not normally readily visible
      at maturity; achenes narrowly obovate; inner hyaline scale as long as or longer than the achene
      and cupped around it; when an achene is shed, the scales usually are shed with it; inner hya-
      line scale not bifurcated                                                                         L. drummondii
   2. Apices of floral scales spreading, barely exceeding the achenes; achenes normally readily vis-
      ible at maturity; achenes obovate; inner hyaline scale much shorter than achene or absent;
      when an achene is shed it usually leaves the inner scale behind attached to the rachis;
      inner hyaline scale usually bifurcated                                                               L. micrantha

Lipocarpha aristulata (Coville) G.C. Tucker, (bearded or awned). Range map given by Friedland
(1941) showed this taxon within nc TX; Hatch et al. (1990) cited vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2); we
have seen no nc TX specimens but S.D. Jones (pers. comm.) indicated there is a Cooke Co. speci-
men at TEX; he also indicated there is a TEX specimen from Wichita Co. just to the w of nc TX;
also Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Friedland (1941) mapped a number of locations from
the e 1/2 of TX and one from the Trans-Pecos. Jun–Nov. [ Hemicarpha aristulata (Coville) Smyth]

Lipocarpha drummondii (Nees) G.C. Tucker, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835,
Scottish botanist and collector in North America), COMMON HEMICARPHA. Range map given by
Friedland (1941) showed this taxon within nc TX; we have seen no nc TX specimens but S.D. Jones
(pers. comm.) indicated there are Johnson Co. and Tarrant Co. specimens at TEX; Friedland
(1941) mapped several localities in nc and e TX; also se and e TX and Edwards Plateau. May–
Nov. [Hemicarpha drummondii Nees, H. micrantha (Vahl) Pax var. drummondii (Nees) Friedl.]
1156 CYPERACEAE/RHYNCHOSPORA

Lipocarpha micrantha (Vahl) G.C. Tucker, (small-flowered). Moist sandy soils, seasonally wet
areas; Bosque, Henderson, Hood, and Parker cos.; e 1/2 of TX; also Trans-Pecos. Mar-Oct.
[Hemicarpha micrantha (Vahl) Pax, Hemicarpha micrantha var. minor (Schrad.) Friedl.,
Scirpus micranthus Vahl] Inconspicuous and rarely collected.

                       RHYNCHOSPORA BEAK-RUSH, HORNED-RUSH
Tufted or clump-forming perennials (rarely annuals), glabrous or with scabrous-margined
leaves; culms (= stems) triangular; spikelets narrowly ovoid to fusiform or roundish, brownish,
1–few-flowered, in loose or compact clusters, in spike-like or open panicles; lower (1–)2–3 scales
of spikelets sterile; perianth of bristles or absent; achenes with a conspicuous tubercle or “beak”
(= hardened and persistent style base) from the apex (hence the name BEAK-RUSH).
AA genus of ca. 250 species nearly cosmopolitan in distribution, especially in tropical and
warm areas of South America. (Greek: rhyncos, a snout, and spora, a seed, from the beaked
achene)
REFERENCES: Gale 1944; Nixon & Ward 1982; Thomas 1984, 1992.

1. Scales of spikelets white; bracts below inflorescence with white base (much more conspicuous
   in R. colorata).
   2. Bracts exceeding spikelets 1–2(–3) in number, very narrow, most filiform; white spot on bract
      only at the very base, not longer than spikelets; rhizomes absent; leaf blades 3–15 mm long, ca.
      1(–2) mm broad basally, narrower (arcuate-filiform) distally                                              R. nivea
   2. Bracts exceeding spikelets 3–6(–7) in number, (1.5–)2.5–5 mm broad at base; white spot on
      bract conspicuous, usually much longer than spikelets; rhizomes extensively creeping, orangish
      or whitish; leaf blades 6–25 mm long, 1.2–4 mm broad basally and at least 1 mm broad even
      ± distally                                                                                            R. colorata
1. Scales of spikelets variously colored (not white); bracts below inflorescence not with white base.
   3. Mature spikelets conspicuously long, 15–23 mm long; achene body 3.5–5 mm long; tubercle
      13–18 mm long.
      4. Bristles subtending achene shorter than achene body (usually ca. 1/3–2/3 as long)              R. corniculata
      4. Bristles (at least most) much longer than the achene body (ca. 1.5–2.5 times as long)       R. macrostachya   a
   3. Mature spikelets much shorter (2.5–9 mm long); achene body (to ca. 2 mm); tubercle much
      shorter, 2 mm or less long.
      5. Achene body 0.7–1 mm long, with conspicuous, irregular bone-colored, transverse ridges;
         tubercle ± as wide as body of achene; perianth absent; all scales of spikelets fertile (devel-
         oping an achene); plants annual; rare, known locally only from Milam Co. near e margin of
         nc TX                                                                                                 R. nitens
      5. Achene body 1.5–2 mm long, surface various, but without conspicuous, bone-colored,
         transverse ridges; tubercle definitely narrower than body of achene; perianth of 5–6 bristles
         present; lowest 1(–2) scales of spikelets empty (without an achene); plants perennial;
         widespread in nc TX.
         6. Spikelets 4.5–6 mm long; bristles conspicuously retrorsely (backward or downward)
            barbed, much longer than the achene body; achene body usually smooth                         R. glomerata
         6. Spikelets 2.5–4 mm long; bristles antrorsely (forward or upward) barbed or plumose or
            absent or smooth, shorter than the achene body; achene body usually either honey-
            combed or finely cross-wrinkled.
            7. Scales of spikelets awned; achene body honeycombed; summit of achene with a
               smooth collar-like ring fitted against the tubercle                                          R. harveyi
            7. Scales of spikelets obtuse or with a very short point; achene body usually finely
               transversely-wrinkled; summit of achene narrowed up to style (= tubercle) base,
               without a collar–like ring                                                                R. globularis
                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1157




Lipocarpha aristulata [GWO ]                                                           Lipocarpha micrantha [GWO ]




                                    Lipocarpha drummondii [MOH]




Rhynchospora colorata [GWO ]                                                   Rhynchospora globularis var. globularis [GWO]




                                Rhynchospora corniculata var. interior [STE]




 Rhynchospora glomerata [GWO]                                                  Rhynchospora harveyi [BT3, STE]
1158 CYPERACEAE/RHYNCHOSPORA

Rhynchospora colorata (L.) H. Pfeiff., (colored), WHITE-TOP UMBRELLA-GRASS, STAR-RUSH WHITE-
TOP SEDGE, UMBRELLA-GRASS. Perennial to ca. 56 cm tall; leaves cauline although sometimes
crowded near base; bracts unequal in length, the longer ones mostly 5–15 cm long; white spot
on bracts conspicuous, (2.5–)5–20(–25) mm long. Wet places; included on basis of citation of
vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); se TX and s part of e TX w across much of the
state. (Spring–)Summer. Previously separated into the genus Dichromena [as D. colorata (L.)
Hitchc.].

Rhynchospora corniculata (Lam.) A. Gray var. interior Fernald, (sp.: horned; var.: inland), HORNED
BEAK-RUSH, HORNED-RUSH. Rhizomatous or tufted perennial 0.5–1.5 m tall; culms sharply trian-
gular; inflorescence large, with spreading branches; spikelets strikingly elongate (15–23 mm
long), usually in clusters of 3–7(–14); achene body flattish, 3.5–5 mm long, 2–3.5 mm wide, with
extremely conspicuous, long-subulate tubercle; bristles 3–6, but normally 5, unequal, ca. 2–5
mm long. Mud, edge of ponds, or on decaying logs in water; Grayson, Fannin, Henderson, and
Kaufman cos., also Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Pla-
teau and Trans-Pecos. Spring–Summer (fruit present into fall). Some authorities (eg., Jones et al.
1997) lump this variety.

Rhynchospora globularis (Chapm.) Small var. globularis, (globular, of a little ball or sphere),
GLOBE BEAK-RUSH. Perennial 15–100 cm tall; leaf blades ca. 1.5 mm wide; spikelets 2.5–4 mm
long, 1–3-fruited; bristles to 2/3 as long as achene body; achene body 1.6–2.0 mm long. Damp
sandy soils, disturbed sites; Dallas Co.; mainly e TX. May–Sep.

Rhynchospora globularisvar. recognita Gale is abundant in e TX just to the e of nc TX. Robert
Kral, who is treating the genus for the Flora of North America, has indicated that he will be rec-
ognizing this taxon at the specific level (R. Kral, pers. comm.). Kral indicated that R. globularis
var. recognita is expected in the ne part of nc TX. It is similar to R. globularis; the following key
separating the two is from Gale (1944) with modifications from R. Kral (pers. comm.).

1. Habit frequently depressed (culms often short, but ranging from 14–68 cm tall); leaves usually
   1.5–2 mm wide; branchlets of the cymes terminating in small knobby glomerules; bracts incon-
   spicuous; spikelets 2.5–3 mm long, roundish, dark; achenes 1–1.2 mm wide, 1.3–2.3 mm long
   (including tubercule), finely cancellate, transversely ridged to rugulose               R. globularis var.. globularis
1. Habit robust (culms up to ca. 100 cm tall); leaves usually 2–4 mm wide; branchlets of the cymes
   usually terminating in dense glomerules; setaceous bracts conspicuous (giving the inflorescence
   a bristly appearance); spikelets 3–4 mm long, elongate, reddish; achenes 1.2–1.5 mm wide, 1.3–
   1.6 mm long, coarsely cancellate to striate, tranversely ridged                         R. globularis var.. recognita

Rhynchospora glomerata (L.) Vahl, (in compact clusters), CLUSTER BEAK-RUSH. Tufted perennial
to 1.1 m tall; spikelets usually 2(–3)-fruited; bristles slightly surpassing the tubercle in length;
achene body 1.5–2 mm long. Moist sand; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage (Carr 1994); mainly
se and e TX. Summer.

Rhynchospora harveyi W. Boott, (for its discoverer, Francis Leroy Harvey, 1850–1900, of NY),
HARVEY’S BEAK-RUSH, PLANK BEAK-RUSH. Perennial 20–60 cm tall; leaf blades 1–4 mm wide; in-
florescence narrow, of few small clusters; spikelets 2.5–3 mm long, mostly 1-fruited; bristles < 1/
2 length of achene body; achene body 1.5–1.8 mm long. Damp sandy soils; disturbed sites; se
and e TX w to Grayson and Parker cos., also Edwards Plateau. May–Jul.

Rhynchospora macrostachya Torr. ex A. Gray, (large-spiked), TALL BEAK-RUSH, HORNED BEAK-
RUSH. Perennial similar to R. corniculata except for the longer bristles subtending the achenes
and the plant usually not as tall or coarse; also inflorescence branches usually more stiffly erect
rather than spreading and spikelets usually in clusters of 10 or more; bristles usually 6, mostly
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1159




                                      Rhynchospora nitens [GWO]                      Rhynchospora nivea [CO1]




Rhynchospora macrostaycha [CO1]      Schoenoplectus acutus [CO1]                  Schoenoplectus californicus [MAS]




 Schoenoplectus pungens [MAS]     Schoenoplectus saximontanus [HEA]            Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani [CO1]
1160 CYPERACEAE/SCHOENOPLECTUS

10–12 mm long, antrorsely barbed. Lamar Co. in Red River drainage; mainly se and e TX. Sum-
mer. [R. corniculata var. macrostachya (Torr.) Britton]

Rhynchospora nitens (Vahl) A. Gray, (shining), SHORT-BEAK BALD-RUSH. Glabrous annual 15–80
cm tall; spikelets 4–9 mm long, with numerous scales; perianth absent; achene body ca. as
broad as long; tubercle much wider than long. Wet areas; Milam Co. (BRCH); mainly se and e
TX. Jul–Aug. Previously segregated into the genus Psilocarya [as P. nitens (Vahl) A.W. Wood].
[Psilocarya portoricensis Britton]

Rhynchospora nivea Boeck., (snowy, white), SNOWY WHITE-TOP SEDGE. Tufted, glabrous peren-
nial 10–30(–40) cm tall; spikelets few-flowered, white; longer bracts 1.7–3.7 cm long; white spot
only at the very base of bract. Creek beds on limestone, wet areas; Bell, Brown, Burnet, and
Parker cos., also collected along Turtle Creek, Dallas (Austin Chalk), in 1881 or 1882 by
Reverchon, noted as “very rare”; not found there since (Thomas 1984; Mahler 1988); also e TX
and Edwards Plateau. Previously separated into the genus Dichromena [as D. nivea (Boeck.)
Boeck. ex. Britton, D. reverchonii S.H. Wright].

                              SCHOENOPLECTUS BULRUSH, TULE
Rhizomatous perennials (S. saximontanus, which is rare in nc TX, can be annual) of wet areas
or in water; plants 0.3–5 m tall (0.09–0.65 m tall in S. saximontanus), glabrous or nearly so;
culms (= stems) without blade-bearing leaves or with 1–3 blade-bearing leaves near base,
sharply triangular or bluntly trigonous to nearly round; inflorescences of one or few sessile
spikelets or many in an open panicle, appearing lateral, usually with a single, erect, modified
leaf (= involucral bract) appearing like a continuation of the culm; scales of spikelets awnless
or nearly so; perianth of bristles present or absent (in S. saximontanus); achenes plano-convex
to strongly trigonous.
AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 50 species (Smith 1996); 15 are native to North America plus 2
have been introduced. Approximately 10 species occur in TX (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.). Previ-
ously included in Scirpus (e.g., Kartesz 1994) and according to some, better treated as a section
or subgenus in Scirpus in the broad sense. We are following Smith (1995, 1996) and Jones et al.
(1997) in recognizing this segregate of Scirpus at the generic level. Smith (1995) indicated that
Schoenoplectus and a number of other segregates of Scirpus will be recognized in the forthcom-
ing Cyperaceae treatment for Flora of North America (Vol. 11). This approach is supported by
the phylogenetic studies of Bruhl (1995) which suggested that Scirpus sensu lato is polyphyl-
etic. Some species can be ecological dominants in wetlands and provide valuable food and habi-
tat for wildlife (Smith 1996). Schoenoplectus species were also extensively used by Native
Americans in making baskets, mats, and roof thatching; S. californicus (known in South
America as TOTORA) is still used for making the famous boats (balsas) seen on Lake Titicaca
(Beetle 1950; Heiser 1978). (Greek: schoeno, a reed or rush-like, and plectus, twine, braid, or plait;
alluding to the mat-forming rhizomes of some species)
REFERENCES: Beetle 1941, 1943, 1947; Koyama 1962, 1963; Schuyler 1974; Raynal 1976; Heiser
1978; Strong 1993, 1994; Smith 1995, 1996; Smith & Yatskievych 1996.

1. Plants 0.09–0.65 m tall; culms 0.5–1.5 mm thick near base; perianth bristles absent; achenes with
   ca. 10–20 prominent (use lens), transverse, wavy, mostly sharp ridges; known in nc TX only
   from Coryell Co.                                                                                S. saximontanus
1. Plants 0.3–5 m tall; culms 2–23 mm thick near base; perianth bristles present; achenes smooth;
   widespread in nc TX.
   2. Inflorescences unbranched, usually with 1–5 sessile spikelets; plants 0.3–1.2 m tall; culms
      sharply triangular, 2–6 mm thick near base                                                         S. pungens
                                                                              SCHOENOPLECTUS/CYPERACEAE 1161

  2. Inflorescences branched, with many, mostly pedicelled spikelets; plants 1–5 m tall; culms
     usually nearly round to bluntly trigonous, 8–23 mm thick near base.
     3. Achene bristles 2–4 (2–3 different appearing stamens also present), with closely spaced
        lateral projections; leaf sheaths retrorsely fimbriate-filiferous (= fringed)                  S. californicus
     3. Achene bristles usually 4–6 (2–3 different appearing stamens also present), with well-spaced
        barbs; leaf sheaths smooth or merely lacerate (= cut as if torn).
        4. Spikelets in glomerules of 3–8, sessile or on short stiff pedicels; scales of spike-
           lets often ca. 5 mm long, with conspicuous elongate reddish glutinous spots (under a
           hand lens)                                                                                        S. acutus
        4. Spikelets usually in glomerules of 2 (sometimes 3 or single) on long lax pedicels;
           scales of spikelets often 3–4 mm long, nearly smooth (occasionally with a few reddish
           spots near midrib)                                                                   S. tabernaemontani

Schoenoplectus acutus (Muhl. ex Bigelow) À. Löve & D. Löve, (acute, sharp-pointed), HARD-STEM
BULRUSH, ALKALI TULE. Rhizomatous perennial 1–3 m tall forming extensive colonies; spikelets
8–15 mm long; achenes plano-convex or unequally biconvex. Calcareous mud, usually in water;
Grayson and Rockwall cos.; w TX, rare e and nc TX. May. [Scirpus acutus Muhl. ex Bigelow] Ac-
cording to Beetle (1950), this species, which was used for mats and roofing, “… was very impor-
tant in the Indian cultures of western North America.”

Schoenoplectus californicus (C.A. Mey.) Soják, (of California), CALIFORNIA BULRUSH, GIANT BUL-
RUSH, TULE, CALIFORNIA TULE. Perennial 1–3+ m tall, from tight subrhizomatous knots; culms
bluntly trigonous; spikelets 6–11 mm long; achenes plano-convex or biconvex. Mud or shallow
water; nearly throughout TX. Spring and summer. [Scirpus californicus (C.A. Mey.) Steud.]

Schoenoplectus pungens (Vahl) Palla, (piercing, sharp-pointed), AMERICAN BULRUSH, SWORD-
GRASS, THREE-SQUARE BULRUSH. Rhizomatous perennial 0.3–1.2 m tall; spikelets 5–20 mm long;
achenes lenticular to trigonous. Wet soils; Ellis, Montague, and Wise cos.; widespread in TX.
Apr–Jul. [Scirpus pungens var. longispicatus (Britton) S.G. Sm., Scirpus americanus Pers. var.
longispicatus Britton] Varieties longispicatus and pungens intergrade extensively (Smith 1996);
we are therefore following Kolstad (1986b) and Kartesz (1994) in not recognizing infraspecific
taxa in this species; Smith (1996) recognized var. longispicatus and var. pungens in TX and sepa-
rated the two as follows:

1. Styles trifid; achenes thickly lenticular to bluntly trigonous; floral scales [scales of spikelets]
   brown to stramineous                                                                                var. longispicatus
1. Styles bifid; achenes lenticular; floral scales brown                                                     var. pungens

Schoenoplectus saximontanus (Fernald) J. Raynal, (rocky mountain), ROCKY MOUNTAIN BUL-
RUSH. Small annual or perennial 9–65 cm tall; rhizomes inconspicuous, ca. 1 mm thick; culms
cylindric, ridged when dry; 0–2 smaller bracts sometimes present in addition to the erect bract
which appears like a continuation of the culm; inflorescences with 1–10(–20) spikelets, usually
sessile or nearly so, sometimes with 1–2 short branches; spikelets 6–20 mm long; scales with a
slightly recurved awn ca. 0.2–0.5 mm long; achenes usually strongly trigonous. Damp soils or
emergent from water; Coryell Co. (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997); in a band from the Panhandle to s
TX (Smith 1996). Spring–fall. [Scirpus bergsonii Schuyler, Scirpus saximontanus Fernald,
Scirpus supinus L. var. saximontanus (Fernald) T. Koyama]

Schoenoplectus tabernaemontani (C.C. Gmel.) Palla, (for Jacob Theodore von Bergzabern, died
1590, Heidelberg botany professor who Latinized his name as Tabernaemontanus), GREAT BUL-
RUSH, SOFT-STEM BULRUSH, GIANT TULE. Rhizomatous perennial 1–5 m tall; spikelets 6–10 mm
long; achenes plano-convex. The usually terete fresh culms (just below inflorescences) of this
species help distinguish it from the similar S. californicus with bluntly trigonous culms. Wet
1162 CYPERACEAE/SCIRPUS

ground, shallow water around lakes; included on basis of citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5
(Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); widely scattered in TX. May–Jul, occasionally to Oct. [Scirpus
tabernaemontani C.C. Gmel., Scirpus validus Vahl]

                                            SCIRPUS BULRUSH
Perennials of wet areas, with or without rhizomes; plants glabrous or nearly so; culms (= stems)
obtusely triangular, with well-developed leaves; inflorescences of many spikelets in open
panicles, appearing terminal, with 2 or more well-developed leaf-like involucral bracts; scales
of spikelets awnless or essentially so; perianth of bristles.

AIn the strict sense, a cosmopolitan genus of ca. 30 species; 6 are reported for TX (S.D. Jones,
pers. comm.). Bolboshoenus, Isolepis, and Schoenoplectus have traditionally been treated as part
of Scirpus sensu lato (e.g., Kartesz 1994); according to some authorities these segregates are better
treated as sections or subgenera; according to Mabberley (1987), Scirpus is a heterogeneous and
indivisible genus. If treated in the broad traditional sense, the genus contains ca. 200–300 spe-
cies (Tucker 1987; Mabberley 1997). We are following Smith (1995, 1996, 1997a, 1997b) and Jones
et al. (1997) in recognizing the segregates of Scirpus at the generic level. Smith (1995) indicated
that the segregates will be recognized in the forthcoming Cyperaceae treatment for Flora of
North America (Vol. 11). This approach is supported by the phylogenetic studies of Bruhl (1995)
which suggested that Scirpus sensu lato is polyphyletic. (The Latin name of the bulrush)
R EFERENCES: Beetle 1947; Schuyler 1966, 1967; Strong 1993, 1994; Smith 1995; Smith &
Yatskievych 1996.

1. Perianth bristles very long, obviously and greatly exceeding the scales of spikelets in length;
   mature inflorescences appearing almost woolly to the naked eye                                          S. cyperinus
1. Perianth bristles shorter than to slightly exceeding the scales of spikelets in length; mature inflo-
   rescences not appearing woolly.
   2. Scales of spikelets with prominent green-keeled midribs; spikelets 6–10 mm long; spikelets
      usually sessile, clustered in glomerules                                                             S. pendulus
   2. Scales of spikelets without prominent green-keeled midrib; spikelets 2–5 mm long; at least
      some spikelets often on separate peduncles.
      3. Bristles 0–3, shorter than achenes; bracts usually shorter than inflorescences; each spikelet
         with 70–150(–200) florets                                                                       S. georgianus
      3. Bristles usually 5 or 6, shorter than or little longer than the achenes; bracts usually as long
         as or exceeding the inflorescences; each spikelet with 20–40 florets                             S. atrovirens

Scirpus atrovirens Willd., (dark green, from the fuscous spikelets), PALE BULRUSH. Rhizomatous
perennial to 1.5 m tall, resembling S. georgianus; sheaths and blades cross-septate; spikelets 2–4
mm long. Moist areas; Grayson Co.; mainly e TX and Panhandle. Summer.

Scirpus cyperinus (L.) Kunth, (resembling Cyperus), WOOLLY-GRASS BULRUSH. Perennial 0.8–2 m
tall, perennating by basal offshoots; spikelets 3–6 mm long. Wet or boggy places; Lamar Co.,
also Delta and Red River cos. (S.D. Jones, pers. comm.); mainly e TX. Summer. [C. cyperinus var.
rubricosus (Fernald) Gilly]

Scirpus georgianus R.M. Harper, (of Georgia). Tufted perennial, not distinctly rhizomatous,
0.5–1.5 m tall; sheaths and blades usually not cross-septate; spikelets to 4 mm long. Moist or
wet soils; included based citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly
e TX. Spring.

Scirpus pendulus Muhl., (pendulous, hanging). Cespitose perennial to 1.5 m tall; spikelets 5–10
mm long. Ditches, streambeds, pond margins; e TX w to Cooke and Palo Pinto cos. (West Cross
Timbers). Apr–Jun. [S. lineatus of TX authors, not Michx.]
                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1163




   Scirpus atrovirens [CO1]                    Scirpus cyperinus [GWO]                         Scirpus georgianus [TOR]




                      Scirpus pendulus [CO1]
                                                                                       Scleria ciliata [LUN]




Scleria oligantha [LUN]                        Scleria triglomerata [LUN]                                 Scleria verticillata [LUN]
1164 DIOSCOREACEAE/DIOSCOREA

                                            SCLERIA NUT-RUSH
AMonoecious annuals or perennials usually less than 1 m tall; culms (= stems) sharply trian-
gular, leafy; inflorescences of axillary and terminal, small, compact clusters of few spikelets, leafy-
bracted at base; staminate and pistillate spikelets often mixed within a cluster; achenes globose
or ovoid to obovoid, usually whitish, bony, or crustaceous, usually on a hardened pad (= hypogynum).

A genus of 200 species of tropical and warm areas. (Greek: scleria, hardness, from the hardened fruit)
REFERENCES: Core 1936, 1966; Fairey 1967; Kessler 1987.

1. Plants annual, without rhizomes; achenes wrinkled or roughened, ca. 1 mm long, without
   pad at base; plants rare or possibly not currently present in nc TX                                    S. verticillata
1. Plants perennial with short rhizomes; achenes smooth or warty, 2–4 mm long, with ring-like pad
   at base; plants widespread in nc TX.
   2. Achene body rough (reticulate, papillose or warty); leafy bracts of inflorescence pubescent
      and long ciliate                                                                                          S. ciliata
   2. Achene body smooth; leafy bracts of inflorescence glabrous OR pubescent and long ciliate.
      3. Pad completely covered with rough white crust, without distinct tubercles; bracts glabrous
                                                                                                        S. triglomerata
      3. Pad not covered with rough white crust, but with 8 or 9 papillose tubercles (use lens); bracts
         pubescent                                                                                          S. oligantha

Scleria ciliata Michx., (ciliate, fringed), FRINGED NUT-RUSH, CILIATE NUT-RUSH. Plant 20–90 cm
tall; lower leaf sheaths densely pilose with slightly reflexed hairs. Low sandy woods or open
areas; se and e TX w to Dallas and Montague cos. Late Apr–Jul. [S. ciliata Michx. var. elliottii
(Chapm.) Fernald]

Scleria oligantha Michx., (few-flowered), LITTLE-HEAD NUT-RUSH, FEW-FLOWER NUT-RUSH. Peren-
nial 30–60 cm tall; leaf sheaths pubescent or glabrous. Sandy woods, drainage areas; se and e
TX w to Dallas and Limestone cos. Late Apr–May.

Scleria triglomerata Michx., (three-clustered), WHIP-GRASS, WHIP NUT-RUSH, TALL NUT-RUSH. Plant
40–100 cm tall, glabrous or nearly so except for scabrous culm angles and leaf margins. Sandy
open woods, low areas; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. Jun.

Scleria verticillata Muhl. ex Willd., (whorled), LOW NUT-RUSH, WHORLED NUT-RUSH. Plant tufted,
slender, 10–60 cm tall; leaf sheaths pilose; leaf blades glabrous. Collected in Dallas Co. by
Reverchon (Core 1966), not found in nc TX since; also reported from Post Oak Savannah and
Edwards Plateau. Jul–Sep.


                            DIOSCOREACEAE YAM FAMILY
AA medium-sized family (880 species in 8 genera) of mostly herbaceous twining vines from
tubers found throughout tropical and warm areas with a few in the n temperate zone; most spe-
cies are in the genus Dioscorea. Raphides are usually present as are steroidal saponins and
often lactone alkaloids. (subclass Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbaceous twining vines with alternate, petiolate, cordate
ovate leaves with 7–11 main veins; flowers very small, with 6 stamens and an inferior ovary;
fruit a 3-winged capsule.
REFERENCES: Dahlgren et al. 1985; Al-Shehbaz & Schubert 1989.

                                              DIOSCOREA YAM
Dioecious perennials from rhizomes (in nc TX species) or tubers (in some other species); stems
to 3 m or more long, leaning on other plants or twining-climbing; leaves alternate, opposite,
                                                                             ERIOCAULON/ERIOCAULACEAE 1165

whorled, or a mixture of these, long-petiolate; leaf blades cordate-ovate, cordate at base, acute to
acuminate at apex, with 7–11 main, convergent, parallel veins and numerous cross veins; flow-
ers very small, whitish to greenish yellow, in axillary panicles or spikes; perianth radially sym-
metrical; petals and sepals 3 each, 0.2–2 mm long; stamens 6; ovary inferior; stigmas 3, bilobed;
capsule 3-winged, 1.2–3 cm long, loculicidal, splitting through wings; seeds flat, with a broad
wing equal to or wider than body.
AA genus of ca. 850 species of tropical and warm areas. Dioscorea species (YAMS) are culti-
vated in some areas as a subsistence crop; proper preparation to remove toxic saponins is
necessary. The storage tubers of Mexican species of Dioscorea have served as a source of steroi-
dal precursor molecules (e.g., diosgenin) for cortisone and the active ingredients in early birth
control pills (Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977). Dioscorea bulbifera L. (AIR-POTATO), native of tropical
Asia and possibly Africa, contains diosgenin, alkaloids, oxalates, and other toxins (Morton
1982); it has both inedible and edible forms (Bailey & Bailey 1976). This species, which is some-
times cultivated in nc TX, can be distinguished from native taxa by the presence of conspicu-
ous, axillary, aerial bulbils. (Named for Dioscorides, Greek naturalist of the first century A.D.,
who wrote Materia Medica, a description of ca. 600 plants used medicinally)

1. Petioles usually pubescent at junction with leaf blade, usually 7 cm or more long on well-devel-
   oped leaves; leaves in whorls of 4–7 at 1 or more lower nodes                                      D. quaternata
1. Petioles glabrous at junction with leaf blade, usually 6 cm or less long on well-developed leaves;
   leaves of lower nodes at most opposite or with 3 in close proximity                                     D. villosa

Dioscorea quaternata J.F. Gmel., (in fours). Rhizomes relatively stout, 10–15 mm thick, often con-
torted irregularly or with many short branches; leaves of lower nodes whorled, opposite to al-
ternate above; leaf blades 7–15 cm long; capsules usually 2.5–3 cm long; seeds ca. 18 mm wide.
Moist rich woods; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al.
(1990); ne TX. Apr–Jun. [D. villosa var. glabrifolia (Bartlett) Fernald]

Dioscorea villosa L., (soft-hairy), WILD YAM, ATLANTIC YAM, COLICROOT. Rhizomes relatively slen-
der, 5–10 mm thick, ± straight, not much branched; leaves except for the lowest all alternate; leaf
blades 5–11 cm long; capsules 1.2–2.5 cm long; seeds 7–12 mm wide. Low woods; Lamar Co.;
mainly deep e TX. Apr–Jun.


                      ERIOCAULACEAE PIPEWORT FAMILY
AThe Eriocaulaceae is a medium-large (1,100 species in 9 genera) family of usually perennial,
small, scapose herbs distributed mainly in the tropics and warm areas, especially in the Ameri-
cas; a few are in temperate regions. (subclass Commelinidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: wet area herbs with a basal rosette of linear, grass-like leaves;
flowers small and inconspicuous, in a small (5–20 mm in diam.) head at the end of an elongate
naked peduncle; the head often has a whitish appearance.
REFERENCES: Moldenke 1961a; Kral 1966b, 1989; Dahlgren et al. 1985.

                                       ERIOCAULON PIPEWORT
Clump-forming, usually monoecious perennial or biennial herbs reproducing vegetatively by
lateral offshoots or rhizomes; leaves ± all in basal rosette, linear and grass-like in appearance,
sheath-like at base; inflorescence a compact hemispherical to globose head terminating an
elongate, naked, angled peduncle, the peduncle with a basal sheath; heads with involucral and
receptacular bracts; bracts and perianth parts often with conspicuous whitish hairs; flowers
small (ca. 3 mm or less long) and crowded together; sepals 2; petals 2; male flowers with 3–6 sta-
mens; carpels 2; ovary superior; fruit a 1-seeded loculicidal capsule.
1166 HYDROCHARITACEAE

AA genus of ca. 400 species of tropical and warm areas including Japan and North America.
In TX the genus occurs mainly in the se and e parts of the state extending w to near the ex-
treme e margin of nc TX. (Greek: erion, wool, and caulos, a stalk, from the wool at the base of the
scape in the first named species)

1. Mature heads 10–20 mm wide, hard and little compressed upon pressing and drying; involucral
   bracts acute to acuminate at apex; mature scape with 8–12 ridges; leaves 10–40 cm long, ex-
   ceeding the sheaths of the scape in length                                                    E. decangulare
1. Mature heads ca. 5 mm wide, soft and compressed upon pressing and drying; involucral bracts
   rounded at apex; mature scape with 4–7 ridges; leaves 1–6.5 cm long, the sheaths of the scape
   exceeding all or most of the leaves in length                                                      E. texense

Eriocaulon decangulare L., (ten-angled), TEN-ANGLE PIPEWORT, PIPEWORT. Mature scapes 30–110
cm long; mature heads subglobose, dull white; lowermost flowers and bractlets reflexed and
obscuring the subtending involucral bracts; outer involucral bracts narrowly ovate to lan-
ceolate, 2–4 mm long, straw-colored, with clavate white hairs apically; surface of receptacle vil-
lous; receptacular bracts acute to acuminate, sometimes visibly exserted; sepals 2–3 mm long,
yellowish white, with clavate white hairs on keel and apex. Meadows, swamps, pond margins,
bogs; e Milam Co., also Henderson Co. (Moldenke 1948); mainly se and e TX. Apr–Nov.

Eriocaulon texense Körn., (of Texas), TEXAS PIPEWORT, PIPEWORT. Mature scapes 5–30 cm long,
mature head hemispherical, gray except for the white trichomes of the bractlets and perianth
parts and the straw-colored outer involucral bracts; outer involucral bracts suborbicular to
broadly ovate, ca. 1.5 mm long, at maturity usually hidden by the florets; surface of receptacle
with numerous hairs; receptacular bracts acute; sepals ca. 1.5 mm long, dark gray apically, with
clavate white hairs on keel and sometimes margins apically. Wet acidic areas, bogs; c
Henderson Co., also Milam Co. (Moldenke 1948); mainly se and e TX w to near e margin of nc
TX. Moldenke (1961a) indicated Cory recorded the species from the Blackland Prairie. Apr–Jun.

Eriocaulon aquaticum (Hill) Druce, (aquatic), SEVEN-ANGLE PIPEWORT, WHITE-BUTTONS, DUCK-
GRASS, [E. septangulare With.], was reported for TX in vegetational areas 1 and 4 (Fig. 2) by
Hatch et al. (1990). However, Godfrey and Wooten (1979) indicated it occurs in Canada and the
n U.S. s only to North Carolina; R. Kral (pers. comm.) confirmed that this species does not occur
in TX. According to Kral, “Early reports of E. aquaticum (E. septangulare) were based on lack of
understanding of the similar-looking E. texense.” This species can be distinguished by the
heads which are small (4–5 mm wide) and ± dark in appearance due to usually gray to almost
black bracts and perianth parts (only tips of perianth parts and receptacular bracts have whit-
ish hairs); also the receptacles are glabrous.

Ericaulon kornickianum Van Heurck & Müll.Arg., (for Friedrich August Körnicke, 1828–1908,
German botanist), SMALL-HEAD PIPEWORT, is known from e TX and could possibly be expected
near the e margin of nc TX (R. Kral, pers. comm.). This diminutive species has short scapes (5–8
cm long), mature heads 3–4 mm broad, outer involucral bracts not hidden by bractlets and pe-
rianth parts, sepals ca. 1 mm long, and receptacles glabrous.


                                  HYDROCHARITACEAE
        FROG’S-BIT, TAPE-GRASS OR WATERWEED FAMILY
Ours submerged, monoecious or dioecious herbs; leaves basal or subopposite, opposite, or in
whorls along the stem; inflorescences with a spathe; perianth 3-merous or minute or absent;
flowers at the water surface or borne underwater; fruits indehiscent, ripening underwater.
AA small (112 species in 16 genera), cosmopolitan, but mainly tropical family of aquatics; it
                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1167




    Dioscorea quaternata [SM1]




            么                              乆
                                                         Dioscorea villosa [BB2]




                 Eriocaulon decangulare [SID]




么




     乆

           Eriocaulon texense [GWO, SID]                Egeria densa [MAS]
1168 HYDROCHARITACEAE/EGERIA

includes Elodea (WATERWEED, DITCH-MOSS) and Hydrilla. The family is notable for its wide vari-
ety of pollination mechanisms including male flowers that detatch and float or sail to the fe-
male flower, and also anthers that explode and scatter pollen over the water surface; it is one of
relatively few families that exhibit hydrophily—water-mediated pollination; both
hypohydrophily (pollination under water) and epihydrophily (pollination at the water sur-
face) are known in the family (Philbrick 1991, 1993). A number of species are used as aquarium
plants; some have become noxious aquatic weeds. We are following Thorne (1993b) and R.
Haynes (pers. comm.) in including Najas, a genus previously recognized in its own family, in the
Hydrocharitaceae. Family name from Hydrocharis, FROGBIT, an Old World genus of 3–6 species
of floating aquatics. (Greek: hydor, water, and charis, graceful, in reference to the habit) (sub-
class Alismatidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: submerged aquatic herbs with leaves EITHER simple, linear
to linear-lanceolate or narrowly oblong, subopposite to opposite or whorled OR long and rib-
bon-like and clustered at base of plant.
REFERENCES: Dahlgren et al. 1985; Thorne 1993b.

1. Leaves subopposite, opposite, or whorled, distributed along the elongate stem, 4.5 cm or less
   long, 3(–5) mm or less wide.
   2. Leaves subopposite or opposite (some can occasionally appear whorled where branches
      arise—if so they are dilated at base); flowers sessile or subsessile, borne underwater; perianth
      absent or minute, clearish or greenish, virtually indistinguishable without a lens; including
      extremely abundant native species                                                                       Najas
   2. Leaves in distinct whorls of 3–8, not dilated at base; flowers (male and/or female) borne to
      the water surface on a thread-like stalk 3–6 cm long; perianth 3–10 mm long, white or translu-
      cent, visible with the naked eye; introduced species found in a few lakes in nc TX (currently
      spreading)
      3. Leaves usually 2–3(–4) cm long, serrulate (teeth scarcely visible to the naked eye) margin-
         ally but lacking teeth on the midvein beneath (fresh leaves thus not rough to the touch);
         male flowers borne to the water surface on a thread-like stalk, with conspicuous white
         perianth parts 8–10 mm long                                                                         Egeria
      3. Leaves usually 1.5(–2) cm or less long, serrate (teeth visible to the naked eye) marginally
         and with teeth on the midvein beneath (fresh leaves thus rough to the touch); male flowers
         detaching and floating to the surface, without a conspicuous white perianth                       Hydrilla
1. Leaves clustered at base of plant on a very short stem, long and ribbon-like, 8–60(–nearly 100)
   cm long, to 8(–20) mm wide                                                                            Vallisneria


                                                     EGERIA
AA genus of 2 species of subtropical South America; it has sometimes been lumped with Elo-
dea (an American genus of 12 species); Elodea canadensis Michx., known from OK but appar-
ently not TX, can be distinguished from the somewhat similar Egeria densa and Hydrilla
verticillata using the following characters: leaves opposite or in whorls of three, mostly 8–15
mm long, leaf margins lacking teeth perceptible to the naked eye, and leaf midveins lacking
teeth. Egeria has nectariferous flowers and a relatively large perianth (Catling & Wojtas 1986);
it is presumably animal-pollinated in contrast to the the many hydrophilous taxa observed in
this family. (Named after a Roman goddess of water or mythical water nymph)
REFERENCES: St. John 1965; Cook & Urmi-König 1984; Catling & Wojtas 1986.

Egeria densa Planch., (dense), WATERWEED. Perennial, submerged aquatic, rooting at bottom or if
broken, drifting; lowermost leaves opposite or in whorls of 3; rest of leaves in whorls of 4–6(–8);
leaves crowded, usually linear-lanceolate, serrulate, transparent, to ca. 2.5(–4) cm long and 3(–5)
mm wide; flowers 3-merous; male spathes 2–4-flowered, in upper axils; male flowers reaching
                                                                 HYDRILLA/HYDROCHARITACEAE 1169

the surface on a long thread-like hypanthium 3–6 cm long; petals white, ca. 8–10 mm long,
much longer than the sepals; anthers 9; female flowers not observed. Lakes, ponds; Dallas,
Grayson (Lake Ray Roberts), and Lamar (Pat Mayse Lake) cos., also Brown (City Reservoir) and
Comanche cos. (HPC); mainly e TX and Edwards Plateau; probably spread from lake to lake by
boats or boat trailers; commonly called ELODEA even though this is the scientific name of a re-
lated genus; widely used in biological laboratories. [Anacharis densa (Planch.) Vict., Elodea
densa (Planch.) Casp.] Native of South America. I

                                          HYDRILLA
AA monotypic Old World genus introduced into the U.S. and Central America. The male
flowers are released underwater, rise to the surface, and float to the female flowers (an example
of epihydrophily—see discussion in Vallisneria generic synopsis). Cook and Lüönd (1982) indi-
cated that during flower opening the stamens spring upward, the anthers burst, and pollen is
scattered in the air, some of this landing on the female flowers and some on the surface of the
water; apparently the pollen grains landing on the water are lost in terms of reproduction and
only those actually landing on the female flower are involved in pollination. Even though the
effective pollen grains never contact the water, the male flowers float and the system can thus
be described as epihydrophily. (Diminutive of Greek: hydra, water, sea serpent)
REFERENCES: Godfrey & Wooten 1979; Cook & Lüönd 1982; Steward et al. 1984; Langeland 1996.

Hydrilla verticillata (L.f.) Royle, (whorled). Perennial, submersed, dioecious or monoecious
aquatic with horizontal stems in the substrate sometimes forming tubers; erect stems branch-
ing, capable of ascending as much as 8.5 m (Godfrey & Wooten 1979), growing horizontally
near the water surface; leaves in whorls of (2–)3–8, sessile, mostly 1.5(–2) cm or less long, 1.5–2
mm wide, narrowly oblong, serrate marginally (the teeth visible to the naked eye), with a single
vein which on the abaxial surface bears conical protrusions tipped with teeth (fresh leaves thus
noticeably rough to the touch); staminate flowers detach and float to surface; pistillate flowers
reach the surface at the end of an elongate, thread-like floral tube 4–5 cm long; perianth seg-
ments 6, colorless, very inconspicuous, 3–5 mm long; fruits 5–6 mm long, ± fusiform. Lakes and
other aquatic habitats; rapidly spreading at present in nc TX; probably spread vegetatively from
lake to lake by boats or boat trailers and also intentionally by fishermen (L. Hartman, pers.
comm.) to “improve” the habitat (this is both illegal and ill-advised since it ultimately degrades
the fishery); Cooke, Dallas, Denton, Hopkins, Hunt, and Tarrant cos. (M. Smart, pers. comm.);
also se and e TX and Edwards Plateau. Native of the Old World, probably the warmer areas of
Asia (Cook & Lüönd 1982). Female plants were first reported in the U.S. in 1960 from South
Florida (misidentified as Elodea canadensis) (Blackburn et al. in Steward et al. 1984); monoe-
cious plants were first observed in the U.S. in Washington, D.C. in 1982; the female (dioecious)
individuals are triploid, while monoecious plants are diploid (Steward et al. 1984). Since its in-
troduction in Florida, this problematic species has spread across the southern U.S. to Texas,
California, Washington state, and up the east coast to Delaware and Maryland. The earliest TX
collection we are aware of is from 1974 (Amerson 2097, BRIT/SMU); the species was first col-
lected in Louisiana in 1973 (Solymosy 1974). Hydrilla is a serious invasive pest which can com-
pletely dominate aquatic habitats eliminating native species, clogging waterways, and severely
curtailing recreational use (Steward et al. 1984; Flack & Furlow 1996; Langeland 1996). In Texas,
Hydrilla is considered a “harmful or potentially harmful exotic plant” and it is illegal to release,
import, sell, purchase, propagate, or possess this species in the state (Harvey 1998). Hydrilla can
easily be confused with Egeria densa. I

                NAJAS NAIAD, WATER-NYMPH, BUSHY-PONDWEED
Submerged, monoecious or dioecious, aquatic herbs; leaves subopposite, opposite, or crowded
1170 HYDROCHARITACEAE/VALLISNERIA

and appearing whorled but inserted at barely different levels, sheathing basally, 3 mm wide or
less; flowers axillary, few; staminate flowers with 1 stamen; pistillate flowers sessile, 1-carpel-
late; stigmas 2–4; fruit a 1-seeded nutlet enclosed in a loose coat.
AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 32 species. The stems have reduced xylem lacking vessels; some
are serious weeds in rice fields, but make good green fertilizer; Najas species are an important
source of food for waterfowl and fish; however, they are capable of vigorous growth and may
become so dense as to impede water flow and the movement of boats (Tyrl et al. 1994). Najas is
one of relatively few genera that exhibit hypohydrophily (pollination under water) in contrast
to some cases of hydrophily in which pollination occurs at the water surface (epihydrophily; e.g.,
Hydrilla, Vallisneria) (Cox 1988; Philbrick 1991, 1993). While traditionally recognized in its own
family, the Najadaceae (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997), Thorne (1993b) treated Najas in the
Hydrocharitaceae, and there is molecular and morphological evidence that it should be lumped
with the Hydrocharitaceae (R. Haynes, pers. comm.). Shaffer-Fehre (1991b), for example, put
Najas in the Hydrocharitaceae based on seed coat anatomy. (Greek: Naias, a water-nymph)
REFERENCES: Morong 1893; Taylor 1909b; Clausen 1936; Haynes & Wentz 1974; Haynes 1977,
1979; Stuckey 1985; Lowden 1986; Shaffer-Fehre 1991a, 1991b; Haynes & Hellquist 1996).

1. Leaves usually minutely denticulate (appearing entire to the naked eye) or nearly entire;
   internodes and back of leaves unarmed                                                       N. guadalupensis
1. Leaves coarsely and obviously (to the naked eye) toothed; internodes and often back of
   leaves armed with small spines                                                                     N. marina

Najas guadalupensis (Spreng.) Magnus, (for the Caribbean Island of Guadalupe, from where the
type was collected), COMMON WATER-NYMPH, SOUTHERN NAIAD. Monoecious; leaves to 25 mm
long and 2 mm wide (usually ca. 10 mm long and 1 mm wide); seeds fusiform, 2–3 mm long,
0.4–0.8 mm wide, areolate, the areolae in rows and easily seen under low magnification. Often
very abundant; possibly in nearly every tank, pond, and lake in nc TX, also streams and ditches;
throughout TX. Jun–Sep.

Najas marina L., (of the sea), HOLLY-LEAF WATER-NYMPH, SPINY NAIAD. Dioecious; leaves to 45 mm
long and 3 mm wide; seeds ovoid, 4–5 mm long, 1.2–2.3 mm wide, smooth or minutely areolate,
the areolae irregularly arranged. Lakes and ponds; Somervell Co.; also in TX in Cameron, Tom
Green, Travis, and Zapata cos. (Stuckey 1985). May–Jul.

                            VALLISNERIA TAPE-GRASS, EEL-GRASS
AA genus of 2–10 species of tropical and warm temperate areas of the world. Pollination oc-
curs when male flowers break off, float to surface, open, and float to the female flowers which
are borne at the surface on long peduncles; the female flowers create a slight depression in the
surface of the water and the male flowers fall into this depression (Cox 1988); this type of
hydrophily (= water-mediated pollination) occurring at the water surface is known as
epihydrophily (in contrast to hypohydrophily or underwater pollination as seen in Najas)
(Philbrick 1993). Some workers (e.g., Cox 1988) further divide epihydrophily into a category in
which pollen is transported just above the surface of the water (e.g., Hydrilla, Vallisneria) and a
category in which pollen is transported directly on the surface of the water (e.g., Elodea)
(Named for Antonio Vallisneri, 1661–1730, an Italian botanist)
REFERENCE: Rydberg 1909.

Vallisneria americana Michx., (of America), AMERICAN WILD-CELERY, EEL-GRASS, WATER-CELERY.
Submerged stoloniferous aquatic; leaves clustered at base of plant on a very short stem, long
and ribbon-like, 8–60(–nearly 100) cm long, to 8(–20) mm wide; male flowers numerous, tiny,
breaking from a spathe and free-floating at maturity, with 3 very thin, transparent sepals and 1
                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1171




                                                        Najas guadalupensis [STE]


Hydrilla verticillata [GWO]




                                                    乆




                                                                   么

                                                                Najas marina [MAS]




                      Vallisneria americana [LAM]
1172 IRIDACEAE/ALOPHIA

transparent petal; female flowers solitary in pedunculate spathes at the water surface at flower-
ing time, with 3 thickish persistent sepals 3–4 mm long and 3 rudimentary, soon disintegrating
petals to ca. 2 mm long; peduncles to 1 m long, coiling after pollination and pulling the flowers
below the surface; fruits cylindric, 8–18 cm long; to ca. 5 mm in diam. Lakes, flowing streams;
introduced into Lake Ray Roberts (Grayson Co.) (M. Hackett, pers. comm.) but no nc TX speci-
mens seen; rare in se and e TX w to Edward Plateau. Apr–Jul. [V. spiralis of authors, not L.]
Where abundant in the n U.S., it is a valuable wildlife food.


                                   IRIDACEAE IRIS FAMILY
Plants annual or perennial herbs from fibrous roots or a bulb, corm, or rhizome; leaves basal or
alternate; leaf blades equitant (2-ranked, folded around a stem in the manner of the legs of a
rider around a horse; the stem and leaves together having a flattened appearance), or pleated, or
concave above, or with prominent midrib; inflorescences various; flowers arising from a spathe
of bracts; tepals 6, in 1 or 2 rows, similar or of 2 different sizes or shapes; stamens 3; pistil 1; stig-
mas petaloid in Iris and some other genera; ovary inferior; fruit a capsule.
AA medium-large family (1,700 species in 82 genera) of nearly worldwide distribution in
tropical and temperate regions, but especially s Africa, e Mediterranean, and Central and South
America; it includes many important ornamentals in addition to Iris, including Crocus, Gladi-
olus, and Tigridia (TIGER-FLOWER). The world’s most expensive spice, saffron, important as a
food coloring, is obtained from the stigmas of Crocus sativus L. (subclass Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: herbs with equitant leaves and flowers subtended by bracts,
with a 6-parted petaloid perianth, 3 stamens, and a 3-celled inferior ovary; the somewhat simi-
lar Liliaceae have 6 stamens and a superior or inferior ovary.
REFERENCES: Dahlgren et al. 1985; Goldblatt 1990; Goldblatt & Takei 1997.

1. Leaves flat; rootstock a rhizome or obsolete and roots fibrous (except Iris xiphium with a bulb).
   2. Tepals similar in size and positioning (but some can be narrower); style branches filiform,
      entire; flowers small (ca. 12 mm or less long); plants grass-like vegetatively                    Sisyrinchium
   2. Tepals not similar in size or positioning, the inner whorl erect, the outer whorl reflexed; style
      branches petaloid, cleft at apex; flowers large (much more than 12 mm long); plants not grass-
      like, the leaves large                                                                                      Iris
1. Leaves plicate (= folded like a fan), occasionally so narrow that pleats not developed; rootstock a
   bulb.
   3. Tepals (3 inner vs. 3 outer) conspicuously unequal in size, variously patterned, either with very
      small inner tepals dark (blackish violet) towards base or inner tepals spotted reddish brown
      over yellow towards base; anthers 6–10 mm long.
      4. Tepals blue or purple-blue, yellow color never present; outer larger tepals lanceolate to
         broadly so, with a violet halo (= ring) outlining whitish, purple-dotted base; inner tepals
         much smaller, ca. 8 mm long, blackish violet towards base, acuminate apically; cauline leaves
         if present reduced to bract-like structures                                                       Herbertia
      4. Tepals velvety purple to rose-purple, spotted reddish brown over yellow towards base; outer
         large tepals ovate; inner tepals ca. 15 mm long, obtuse apically; cauline leaves leaf-like to-
         wards base of stem, becoming bract-like above                                                       Alophia
   3. Tepals nearly equal in size and appearance, uniformly blue except lighter to white at very base
      giving the perianth the appearance of a white “eye”; anthers 11–15 mm long                          Nemastylis


                                                   ALOPHIA
AA genus of 5 species of perennial herbs native from the s United States to South America;
some are used as cultivated ornamentals. (Greek: a, without, and lophos, crest)
                                                                          HERBERTIA/IRIDACEAE 1173

Alophia drummondii (Graham) R.C. Foster, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835,
Scottish botanist and collector in North America), PURPLE PLEAT-LEAF. Perennial from a shallow
bulb; basal leaves sheathing, narrowly linear to linear-lanceolate, to ca. 30 cm long and 2 cm
wide; cauline leaves leaf-like near base of stem, bract-like above; flowering stem to 75 cm tall;
flowers few, emerging from the spathes; tepals velvety-purple to rose-purple (rarely white),
spotted reddish brown over yellow toward base, to ca. 25 mm long, fugacous; 3 outer tepals
somewhat larger than the 3 longitudinally cupped and apically crimped inner; anthers 6–8 mm
long; capsules ca. 1.5–5 cm long. Sandy soils, grassy areas, and open woods; Dallas Co. (Reverchon
collection), also Milam Co. near e edge of nc TX, also Lamar Co. in Red River drainage (Carr
1994); mainly se and e TX. Mostly May–Jul. [Nemastylis purpurea Herb., Eustylis purpurea
(Herb.) Engelm. and A. Gray, not A. drummondii in the sense of Correll & Johnston (1970)]. m/77

                                          HERBERTIA
AA mainly South American genus of 4 species of perennial herbs with 1 species in TX and
LA; some cultivated as ornamentals. (Named for William Herbert, 1778–1847, Dean of
Manchester and an authority on bulbiferous plants)
REFERENCE: Goldblatt 1977 [1978].

Herbertia lahue (Molina) Goldblatt subsp. caerulea (Herb.) Goldblatt, (sp.: derivation unknown;
subsp.: dark blue). Scapose herb from a bulb; leaves with sheathing bases, narrowly linear, to ca.
20 cm long, usually 6 mm or less wide, cauline leaves if present reduced and bract-like; scape to
ca. 30 cm tall; spathes with 1–2 flowers; perianth ca. 5 cm across; 3 outer tepals usually pale or
dark lavender with patterned base, to 25 mm long; 3 inner tepals much smaller, with upper
part violet and lower blackish violet, sometimes with white spots; anthers 7–10 mm long; cap-
sules to 25 mm long. Grasslands and prairies; Denton Co.; also Dallas Co. (probably introduced
with sod–R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); mainly se and e TX; endemic to TX and LA. Mar–May.
[Alophia drummondii of Correll & Johnston (1970) and Mahler (1988), not (Graham) R.C. Fos-
ter, H. caerulea (Herb.) Herb., Trifurcia lahue (Molina) Goldblatt subsp. caerulea (Herb.)
Goldblatt] The name Alophia drummondii was misapplied by Correll & Johnston (1970) and
Mahler (1988) to this species which is correctly placed in Herbertia (Goldblatt 1977 [1978]).m/92

                                 IRIS FLAG, FLEUR-DE-LIS
Ours perennials from rhizomes (bulb in I. xiphium); leaves flat (nearly cylindrical in I.
xiphium), equitant; flowers usually large and showy, usually mostly bluish, purplish, white, or
variously colored in cultivated forms; perianth segments (tepals) of 2 types, the outer (= falls)
deflexed or spreading, the inner (= standards) usually erect; style divided into 3 petaloid
branches, each overlying a stamen and the claw of a fall; hypanthial tube present.
AA mostly n temperate genus of ca. 210 species; Iris species are very important ornamentally;
e.g., they are the “fleur-de-lis” of French royalty (Tveten & Tveten 1993). Several species are also
grown for orris, a powder with the odor of violets; it is obtained from the rhizomes and used in
perfumes.  Leaves and especially the rhizomes of some species (e.g., I. germanica, I.
pseudacorus) contain an irritating resinous substance (irisin) which can cause severe digestive
upset if eaten and dermatitis if handled (Schmutz & Hamilton 1979; Lampe & McCann 1985).
There are no Iris species native to nc TX; all of the following are Old World taxa that are intro-
duced, persist, and escape. In addition, LOUISIANA IRIS, hybrids of I. fulva Ker. Gwal., I.
giganticaerulea Small, and to a lesser degree I. brevicaulis Raf. (all native to LA or adjacent ar-
eas), are also cultivated in nc TX, especially in wet areas such as pond margins (e.g., Edith
Wolford of Fannin Co.). These are rhizomatous, have flat leaves and beardless falls, and are very
variable in color. (Named after Iris, Greek goddess of the rainbow, from flower colors)
REFERENCES: Dykes 1913; Anderson 1936; Foster 1937.
1174 IRIDACEAE/NEMASTYLIS

1. Leaves nearly cylindrical, channeled on upper surface; plants with a bulb                                  I. xiphium
1. Leaves flat, the two surfaces identical; plants with a thick rhizome.
   2. Petals yellow; standards 4–8 mm wide; falls glabrous                                             I. pseudacorus
   2. Petals bluish, purplish, or white (or variously colored in cultivated forms); standards 30–60 mm
      wide; falls with a beard of multicellular hairs.
      3. Spathes entirely scarious (= dry, papery, and translucent or transparent) at flowering time,
         20–35 mm long; hypanthial tube 8–11 mm long                                                            I. pallida
      3. Spathes herbaceous (= greenish) in the lower half at flowering time, the upper half scarious,
         35–55 mm long; hypanthial tube 17–25 mm long                                                     I. germanica

Iris germanica L., (German), GARDEN IRIS. Perianth bluish violet to white or variously colored in
a diversity of cultivated forms; falls 40–60 mm wide; standards 45–60 mm wide. This is the
commonly cultivated Iris widely planted in TX. It persists indefinitely and escapes widely.
Grayson Co., also Dallas (Ed McWilliams, pers. comm.) and Tarrant (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.)
cos. Spring. Probably of hybrid origin from several European species. Toxic (Lampe & McCann
1985).  I

Iris pallida Lam., (pale), BLUE FLAG, ORRIS. Perianth lilac to violet; falls 30–50 mm wide; stan-
dards 30–45 mm wide. Cultivated and escapes; Dallas Co., also Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers.
obs.). Apr–May. Native to the Old World. I

Iris pseudacorus L., (false sweet-flag), YELLOW FLAG. Perianth yellow; falls 20–30 mm wide;
standards 4–8 mm wide; hypanthial tube 10–15 mm long. Commonly cultivated and escapes,
in ponds and lake margins; Parker and Tarrant (Fort Worth Botanic Garden) cos. (R. O’Kennon,
pers. obs). Apr–May. Native to Europe and n Africa. Toxic (Lampe & McCann 1985). I

Iris xiphium L., (sword-leaved), DUTCH IRIS, SPANISH IRIS. Flowers usually solitary; perianth blue (to
other colors in cultivated forms); falls 18–25 mm wide; standards 15–20 mm wide. Cultivated
and escapes; Dallas Co. Apr–May. Native to Europe and n Africa. I

                 NEMASTYLIS CELESTIAL, PLEAT-LEAF, SHELL-FLOWER
AA genus of 5 species ranging from the s U.S. to Central America. (Greek: nema, a thread, and
stylos, pillar, column, or style, for the slender style branches)
REFERENCES: Foster 1945; Goldblatt 1975.

Nemastylis geminiflora Nutt., (twin-flowered), PRAIRIE CELESTIAL, PRAIRIE PLEAT-LEAF, CELESTIAL-
LILY, PRAIRIE-IRIS. Perennial from a bulb 2–3 cm in diam.; basal leaves (2–)3, 20–40 cm long, 3–6
mm wide; cauline leaves 2 or 3, to 35 cm long, 5–11 mm wide, at least one exceeding the inflo-
rescence; flowering stems 12–30(–46) cm tall; spathes 1–2-flowered; tepals subequal, to 3 cm
long, blue, lighter at base giving the appearance of an “eye,” all flat or saucer-shaped; filaments
free or connate at very base; anthers 11–15 mm long; capsules 15–25 mm long. Prairies or open
oak woods; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. Mar–May. According to Wills
and Irwin (1961), the flowers are only open for a few hours; they indicated flower opening oc-
curs in late morning with the perianth parts curling up usually before 3 p.m. m/100

Nemastylis nuttallii Pickering ex R.C. Foster, (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-
American botanist), is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational areas 3 and 4 (Fig. 2); we have
seen no TX material and Goldblatt (1975) gave a range map showing only AR, OK, and MO. It
can be distinguished by the following characters: filaments united; anthers ca. 4 mm long;
cauline leaves < 4 mm wide or bract-like.

                    SISYRINCHIUM BLUE-EYED-GRASS, GRASS-VIOLET
Annuals or perennials from fleshy-fibrous roots; leaves few, equitant; flowers solitary or in
                                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1175




                                            Herbertia lahue subsp. caerulea [DOR, SM1]




Alophia drummondii [DOR]




                                                                                                     Iris pallida [NIC]

                    Iris germanica [NIC]




                                                                     Iris xiphium [BT3]



                        Iris pseudacorus [CO1]                                                Nemastylis geminiflora [SM1, STE]
1176 IRIDACEAE/SISYRINCHIUM

small, umbel-like clusters, from a pair of leaf-like bracts (referred to as the spathe), closed at
night or in cloudy weather; perianth radially symmetrical, the tepals similar or alternating nar-
row and wide, bluish to purplish, rose or white, often with a yellow “eye”; stamens united into a
narrow column.
AA mainly American genus (especially Central and South America) of 80 species with 1 in
Ireland (possibly naturalized); some are cultivated as ornamentals. It is a taxonomically diffi-
cult group that needs detailed study; hybridization sometimes occurs, further complicating the
picture. Mosquin (1970) proposed lumping a number of the species, including S. albidum, S.
angustifolium, S. campestre, and S. langloisii, into a single, widespread, variable taxon. While
the flowers are relatively small, the plants are often abundant, making showy displays along
roadsides and open areas. The most widely used common name, BLUE-EYED-GRASS, is doubly
incorrect, the plants neither having a blue center or “eye” nor being related to grasses. (Name
used by Theophrastus for some plant, later transferred to this genus; possibly derived from
Greek: sys: with, and rhynchus, snout or beak; significance not known)
REFERENCES: Bicknell 1901; Shinners 1962b; Mosquin 1970; Goldblatt et al. 1989; Hornberger
1991.

1. Tepals 3–7 mm long, lavender-pink to purple-rose, occasionally white; plants annual                           S. minus
1. Tepals 6.5–12 mm long, white to pale or deep blue or blue-purple; plants perennial.
   2. Bracts immediately subtending flowers (spathe or spathe plus additional leafy bract located
      so close as to be touching spathe) clearly different in length; flowers white to light blue; stems
      usually without leaves or leafy bracts except those immediately subtending the flowers; mar-
      gins of outer spathe bract not fused at base or only slightly so (for 1 mm or less).
      3. Spathes (each composed of 2 bracts) usually paired at stem apex; the pair of spathes imme-
         diately subtended by an elongate bract much longer than the spathes                                  S. albidum
      3. Spathe (composed of 2 bracts) single at stem apex; spathe not subtended by an elongate
         bract                                                                                              S. campestre
   2. Bracts immediately subtending flowers equal in length or nearly so; flowers intense blue to
      blue-violet to purple-blue, rarely white; stems with leaves or leafy bracts in addition to those
      immediately subtending the flowers; margins of outer spathe bract fused at base (for 1.1 mm
      or more).
      4. Stems winged with each wing equaling stem width and at least 1 mm wide                        S. angustifolium
      4. Stems not broadly winged.
         5. Ovaries usually glabrous; plants drying medium- to olive-green; stems usually numerous
                                                                                                           S. pruinosum
         5. Ovaries minutely pubescent (under a hand lens); plants sometimes drying light-green
            to glaucous, particularly in S. chilense; stems few to numerous.
            6. Leaves 2–4 mm wide; narrower tepals 1.3–3.3 times longer than broad; capsules 4–7
               mm long; stems solitary to few                                                                  S. chilense
            6. Leaves 1–2 mm wide; narrower tepals (2.5–)3–5 times longer than broad; capsule 3.5–
               4.5 mm long; stems usually numerous                                                           S. langloisii

Sisyrinchium albidum Raf., (white), WHITE BLUE-EYED-GRASS. Plant 20–40 cm tall; stems narrow,
broadly winged, simple; leafy bract so close to the spathes as to appear to be the much elon-
gated outer bract of the spathe; paired spathes sessile; flowers white to light blue. In open
woods; Milam and Wise cos.; e and nc TX. Mar–Apr.

Sisyrinchium angustifolium Mill., (narrow-leaved), BERMUDA BLUE-EYED-GRASS. Plant 15–30 cm
tall; peduncles 1–5 mm longer than the subtending leafy bract; flowers blue to blue-violet,
rarely white; capsules 4–5.5 mm long. Sandy woods; Dallas and Lamar cos.; mainly se and e TX,
also Edwards Plateau. Mar–May. [S. bermudiana of authors, not L.]
                                                                       ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1177




 Sisyrinchium albidum [BB2]                Sisyrinchium angustifolium [TOR]                 Sisyrinchium campestre [BB2]




                                                                Sisyrinchium langloisii [HEA]




Sisyrinchium chilense [CUR]




                              Sisyrinchium minus [ADD]                                Sisyrinchium pruinosum [SHI]
1178 JUNCACEAE

Sisyrinchium campestre E.P. Bicknell, (of the plains or fields), PRAIRIE BLUE-EYED-GRASS. Plant 15–
28 cm tall; stems narrow, broadly winged, simple, without leafy bracts or one rarely present;
outer bract of spathe ca. 1.5–2(–5) times as long as the inner; flowers white to light blue; cap-
sules 3–4 mm long. Prairies; Delta, Grayson, and Fannin cos.; se and e TX w to n part of nc TX,
also Edwards Plateau. Apr–May.

Sisyrinchium chilense Hook., (of Chile), SWORD-LEAF BLUE-EYED-GRASS. Plant 15–50 cm tall;
stems solitary or few, slightly to strongly glaucous or gray-green; flowers blue-purple. Prairies; w
edge of Blackland Prairie (Bell and Grayson cos.) s and w to w TX. Apr–May. [S. ensigerum E.P.
Bicknell]

Sisyrinchium langloisii Greene, (for Rev. A.B. Langlois, 1832–1900, French-born clergyman and
botanist in LA), PALE BLUE-EYED-GRASS. Plant 12–35 cm tall; stems usually numerous; perianth
light violet-blue to purple-blue with yellow “eye,” pale outside. Sandy woods; Fannin, Hopkins,
Kaufman, McLennan, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. (Mar–)
Apr–May.

Sisyrinchium minus Engelm. & A. Gray, (smaller), LEAST BLUE-EYED-GRASS. Plant prostrate to
erect, 4–22 cm tall; stems with 1 or 2 leafy nodes and a leafy bract; flowers lavender-pink to
purple-rose, occasionally white, rarely yellow; capsules 4–5 mm long. Sandy soils; Bell and
Navarro cos., also Dallas (Shinners 1948b) and Tarrant (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; mainly se
and c TX. (Mar–)Apr.

Sisyrinchium pruinosum E.P. Bicknell, (with a white glistening coating or bloom), DOTTED BLUE-
EYED-GRASS. Plant 9–30 cm tall; stems numerous; leaves 1–3 mm wide; flowers light violet-blue
to purple-blue, rarely white or very rarely mottled, with yellow “eye,” pale outside; capsules 4–6
mm long. Prairies, disturbed sites, often a lawn weed; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. (Mar–)Apr(–May). Hornberger (1991), Kartesz (1994), and Jones et al. (1997)
lumped this taxon into S. langloisii; pending a treatment of the group as a whole, we are main-
taining it as a separate species. m/106


                                 JUNCACEAE RUSH FAMILY
Grass-like or sedge-like annuals or perennials; stems pithy or hollow, round or somewhat flat-
tened on one side, with smooth nodes; leaves basal and/or cauline, with open or closed, tubular,
basal sheath smoothly continuous with the blade or with margins or inner lining prolonged at
summit into auricles or a scale (resembling the ligule of grasses); leaf blades flat or terete; inflo-
rescences of spike-like racemes, panicles, or heads; perianth of 2 whorls of 3, narrow, scaly,
green to red-brown or yellowish perianth parts; stamens 3 or 6; pistil 1; ovary superior; fruit a
dry dehiscent capsule.
AA small (430 species in 7 genera) family of herbs of temperate and cold areas and tropical
mountains primarily in wet or damp habitats. The family is thought by some authorities (e.g.,
Dahlgren et al. 1985) to be related to the Cyperaceae. (subclass Commelinidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: grass-like or sedge-like herbs with basal, tufted, linear leaves;
flowers inconspicuous with 6 scaly perianth segments, clustered but not in spikelets; fruit a cap-
sule; the somewhat similar Poaceae and Cyperaceae have 1-seeded fruits, either lack a perianth
or have the perianth very reduced, and have flowers in spikelets.
REFERENCE: Dahlgren et al. 1985.

1. Plants glabrous; seeds numerous per capsule; capsules usually 3-celled (sometimes imperfectly
   so); leaf blades terete (= rounded in cross-section) or flat; leaf sheaths open; widespread in nc TX
                                                                                                          Juncus
                                                                                              JUNCUS/JUNCACEAE 1179

1. Plants with pubescence; seeds 3 per capsule; capsules 1-celled; leaf blades flat; leaf sheaths
   closed; mainly e TX, rare in nc TX                                                                               Luzula


                                                  JUNCUS RUSH
Glabrous perennial or annual (only 2 nc TX species) herbs with fibrous roots, some species rhi-
zomatous; leaf blades flattened or terete, sometimes septate; inflorescences variable, sometimes
with numerous rebranched branches; flowers solitary on pedicels or often in head-like clusters;
seeds numerous and small.
AA genus of ca. 300 species, cosmopolitan in distribution but rare in the tropics. (Latin: iuncus,
name for rush; derived from iungere, to join or bind, from use of stems for tying)
REFERENCES: Engelmann 1868; Wiegand 1900.

1. Inflorescence appearing lateral, the “stem” apparently continuing beyond it [actually the “stem”
   beyond the inflorescence is a stem-like involucral bract]; leafy bracts absent or much shorter
   than inflorescence.
   2. Capsules obovoid, clearly longer than broad, obtuse, truncate, or even depressed apically;
      flowers numerous, 30–100 per panicle; upper leaf sheaths without blades; widespread in nc
      TX                                                                                                           J. effusus
   2. Capsules spherical (rarely slightly ovoid), ca. as broad as long, apically turgid; flowers few, 2–25
      per panicle; upper leaf sheaths with blades; in nc TX known only from Henderson and Lamar
      cos.                                                                                                      J. coriaceus
1. Inflorescence terminal, or both terminal and appearing lateral, with either short or long leafy
   bracts.
   3. Small tufted annuals 5–30 cm tall; leaves ca. 0.5 mm or less broad, inrolled or flat, not nodulose
      (= without knot-like septa).
      4. Flowering stems usually branched; inflorescence not head-like; leaves inrolled, filiform;
         bracteoles usually 2–3 beneath each flower; stamens often 6, rarely 3                                  J. bufonius
      4. Flowering stems unbranched; inflorescence of 1–2 head-like clusters which ap-
         pear sessile; leaves flat; bracteoles solitary beneath each flower; stamens 3                          J. capitatus
   3. Perennials 8–125 cm tall; leaves various.
      5. Flowers solitary at ends of pedicels or in few-flowered clusters, not forming a dense
         head-like cluster or glomerule (sometimes clustered in J. dudleyi); leaf blades usu-
         ally thin and flat, or slender and terete, neither equitant (= 2-ranked) nor nodulose (= with
         knot-like septa); each flower closely subtended by a pair of opposite (or nearly so) bracteoles
         clearly smaller than the perianth.
         6. Flowers solitary at ends of pedicels (but may be crowded).
            7. Capsules oblong, nearly equaling or exceeding the perianth; sepals 4.5–5 mm long;
               leaf blades flat or inrolled; capsules distinctly 3-locular                               J. brachyphyllus
            7. Capsules oblong-ovoid to globose-ovoid, shorter than or equaling the peri-
               anth; sepals 3–5 mm long; leaf blades flat, inrolled, or terete; capsules appar-
               ently 1-locular or incompletely 3-locular.
               8. Leaf auricles (at summit of leaf sheath) 1–2.3(–5) mm long, prolonged, distinctly
                  longer than broad, scarious (= thin and dry) or scarious margined; plants 8–45 cm
                  tall                                                                                              J. tenuis
               8. Leaf auricles 0.3–1 mm long, rounded, not longer than broad; firm-membranous or
                  subcoriaceous; plants 20–125 cm tall.
                  9. Leaf blades strongly inrolled, thread-like, grooved on one side or terete; bracteoles
                     underneath flowers acute or acuminate; flowers few and widely scattered                J. dichotomus
                  9. Leaf blades flat or inrolled; bracteoles underneath flowers obtuse or acute;
                     flowers often rather crowded.
1180 JUNCACEAE/JUNCUS

               10. Perianth 4–5 mm long; flowers partly solitary, partly in tight clusters of 2–5
                                                                                                          J. dudleyi
                  10. Perianth 3.3–4.2 mm long; flowers solitary though crowded                           J. interior
      6. Flowers (at least terminal ones) sessile in 2s or 3s, or in small clusters.
         11. Perianth 2.5–3.5 mm long; capsule about equaling the perianth; inflorescences often
             rather open                                                                              J. marginatus
         11. Perianth 4–5 mm long; capsule distinctly shorter than perianth; inflorescences of dense,
             almost head-like clusters                                                                    J. dudleyi
   5. Flowers often forming dense heads or head-like clusters or glomerules; leaf blades rather
      thick and fleshy or spongy, equitant, usually nodulose (except neither equitant nor nodu-
      lose in J. marginatus and J. filipendulus with flat leaves); each flower subtended by a single
      bracteole.
      12. Leaf blades thin and flat, neither equitant nor nodulose.
           13. Perianth 2.5–3.5 mm long; capsule about equal to perianth in length; stems 1.5–3
               mm broad in broadest dimension; panicle much branched, with 10–80 head-like
               clusters                                                                               J. marginatus
         13. Perianth 4–5 mm long; capsule shorter than perianth; stems 0.5–1 mm broad in
             broadest dimension; panicle few branched, of 2–5(–10) head-like clusters     J. filipendulus
     12. Leaf blades rather thick and fleshy or spongy, equitant, usually nodulose.
         14. Flowers in globose heads 6–18 mm high, 15–60 per head; plants with or without
             rhizomes.
             15. Heads 8–15 mm broad in flower, 10–18 mm in fruit; perianth 3.5–5.5 mm long.
                 16. Heads closely crowded, few or none widely spaced; branches of inflores-
                     cence if present to only 4 cm long; basal leafy bract slightly or greatly ex-
                     ceeding the inflorescence                                                                J. torreyi
                 16. Heads mostly well-separated, long-peduncled or separated on the branches
                     by naked internodes longer than diameter of heads; branches of inflorescence
                     1.5–30 cm long; basal leafy bract shorter to slightly longer than inflorescence.
                     17. Larger leaf blades 2.5–7.0 mm wide; branches of inflorescence 2–30 cm
                         long.
                         18. Leaf blades 3–4(–6) mm thick in the larger dimension, with several
                             tough complete septa, tough and resistant to crushing; stems 3–5 mm
                             thick basally; leaves and stems grayish or olivaceous; heads (10–)12–
                             15 mm broad; valves of capsules spreading and free after dehiscence
                                                                                                               J. validus
                         18. Leaf blades 4–7 mm thick in the larger dimension, with many weak
                             incomplete septa, mostly crushed flat in herbarium specimens; stems
                             6–10 mm thick basally; leaves and stems greenish; heads 10–12 mm
                             broad; valves of capsules remaining united at their tips after dehiscence
                                                                                                      J. polycephalus
                     17. Larger leaf blades 0.7–2.0 mm wide; branches of inflorescence 1.5–10(–12)
                         cm long                                                                              J. texanus
             15. Heads 6–8 mm broad in flower, 7–10 mm in fruit; perianth 2.7–3.5 mm long.
                 19. Capsule 1/4–2/3 as long as the perianth, ovoid to obovate, abruptly apiculate
                                                                                                     J. brachycarpus
                 19. Capsule equaling or exceeding the perianth, slender, tapering uniformly to
                     an elongate apex                                                                     J. scirpoides
         14. Flowers in small heads, usually 2–10(–20) (rarely solitary) per head, the heads nar-
             row to hemispherical or nearly globose, 3–6 mm high, 1–8 mm broad; plants with-
             out rhizomes.
                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1181




 Juncus acuminatus [MAS]           Juncus brachycarpus [STE]                  Juncus brachyphyllus [ABR]




   Juncus bufonius [BT3]         Juncus capitatus [SID]                       Juncus coriaceus [GWO]




Juncus dichotomus [GWO]    Juncus diffusissimus [BT3, EN1]                     Juncus dudleyi [EN1]
1182 JUNCACEAE/JUNCUS

             20. Heads (or single flowers) 16–200 or more per inflorescence, narrow to hemi-
                 spherical, 1–6 mm broad (excluding exserted capsules of old flowers), mostly
                 with 1–6 flowers; inflorescences 6–20 cm long, 4–25 cm broad or more.
                 21. Capsules distinctly elongate, becoming 3.8–6 mm long, about twice as long
                     as the perianth; larger leaf blades 0.7–2.5 mm wide, not strongly nodulose
                                                                                              J. diffusissimus
                 21. Capsules becoming 2.0–3.2 mm long, equaling or slightly exceeding the
                     perianth; larger leaf blades 2.5–5 mm wide, strongly nodulose                   J. nodatus
             20. Heads 6–55 per inflorescence, becoming hemispherical or almost globose, 6–9
                 mm broad, mostly with 5–10(–20) flowers; inflorescences 2.5–15 cm long, 1.5–
                 10 cm broad                                                                     J. acuminatus

Juncus acuminatus Michx., (long-pointed, tapering to tip), KNOT-LEAF RUSH. Resembling J.
nodatus, but inflorescences more open. Wet places; Bell and Fannin cos., also Dallas Co. (Mahler
1988) and Parker and Tarrant cos. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); se and e TX w to nc TX, also
Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Apr–Jul.

Juncus brachycarpus Engelm., (short-fruited), WHITE-ROOT RUSH. Plant 15–80 cm tall, rhizoma-
tous or occasionally not so. Damp sandy ground; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. May–Jun, sporadically to Jul.

Juncus brachyphyllus Wiegand, (short-leaved), SMALL-HEAD RUSH. Plant 40–80 cm tall; auricles
of leaf sheaths either shorter or longer than wide, chartaceous or subcoriaceous; floral bractlets
oblong, obtuse or acute. Low, sandy or rocky, open ground; Bosque, Grayson, Navarro, and Wise
cos.; in TX apparently only in nc part of the state. Apr–Jun.

Juncus bufonius L., (pertaining to a toad), TOAD RUSH. Plant 4–18(–30) cm tall; stems often red-
dish tinged; inflorescence 1/4–3/4 the total height of the plant. Damp sandy soils; Bell, Burnet,
Henderson, and Lamar cos.; widespread in TX. Late Apr–Jun.

Juncus capitatus Weigel, (headed), CAPPED RUSH. Plant usually less than 10 cm tall; leaves all
basal. Sandy soils; Grayson Co. (Mahler 1988), also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly e TX, also
Edwards Plateau. May–Jun. First reported for TX by Gould in 1962 [1963] from Walker Co;
Keeney and Lipscomb (1985) gave additional locations.

Juncus coriaceus Mack., (leathery), LEATHERY RUSH. Plant 30–100 cm tall. Moist sand; Henderson
Co., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); e TX w to e margin of nc TX. Summer.

Juncus dichotomus Elliott, (2-parted or forked), FORKED RUSH. Plant 35–80 cm tall. Sandy woods
or open ground, on slopes or in low places; Hopkins, Lamar, and Navarro cos.; mainly e TX w to
e edge of nc TX; scattered elsewhere in the state. May.

Juncus diffusissimus Buckley, (most diffuse), SLIM-POD RUSH. Stems few to many in dense,
rounded clumps 15–65 cm tall; inflorescence very open. Damp sandy ground; se and e TX w to
East Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. May–Jun, less freely to Oct.

Juncus dudleyi Wiegand, (for its discoverer, William Russell Dudley, 1849–1911), DUDLEY’S RUSH.
Plant 25–125 cm tall. Low ground; Denton and Tarrant cos. (Mahler 1988); scattered in TX. Jun.

Juncus effusus L. var. solutus Fernald & Wiegand, (sp.: loosely spreading; var.: loosened), COM-
MON RUSH, SOFT RUSH. Perennial forming dense, rounded clumps 70–130 cm tall; stems with rhi-
zomatous base; leaves basal or nearly so, with very small blades or none; inflorescence appear-
ing lateral, a rather compact panicle, almost head-like while young. Wet open ground; Denton,
Grayson, Hopkins, and Lamar cos., also Bell (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997) and Tarrant (R.
O’Kennon, pers. obs.) cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. Late Apr–Jun.
                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1183




                                     Juncus filipendulus [CO1]




Juncus effusus var. solutus [GWO]         Juncus interior [BB2, EN1]         Juncus marginatus [BB2]




   Juncus nodatus [STE]             Juncus polycephalus [GWO]                   Juncus scirpoides [GWO]
1184 JUNCACEAE/JUNCUS

Juncus filipendulus Buckley, (hanging thread), RING-SEED RUSH. Perennial, tufted or from
slightly swollen bases; stems 15–30 cm long. Moist soils or along streams; Bell and Denton cos.;
also Edwards Plateau and Rolling Plains. Spring–summer.

Juncus interior Wiegand, (inland), INLAND RUSH. Plant 20–80 cm tall. Chiefly low ground, in
open woods or prairies; nearly throughout TX. Late Apr–Jul.

Juncus marginatus Rostk., (margined), GRASS-LEAF RUSH, TWO-FLOWER RUSH, NEEDLE-POINT
RUSH. Plant 15–90 cm tall, with swollen stem base, usually short-rhizomatous; inflorescence
compact, of many small clusters of 2–12 flowers each; to avoid keying errors, this species which
has flowers subtended by only 1 bracteole can be reached either way in the key beginning at
dichotomy 5. Sandy old fields, roadsides, moist areas; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and
Edwards Plateau, also Trans-Pecos. May–Jul, occasionally to Aug. [J. setosus (Coville) Small]
While var. setosus is sometimes recognized (e.g., Jones et al. 1997), we are following Correll and
Johnston (1970), Churchill (1986a) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in not recognizing in-
fraspecific taxa in this species.

Juncus nodatus Coville, (with nodes, knots, or swellings), JOINTED RUSH. Stems 40–110 cm tall,
forming loose clumps from rhizomatous base; inflorescence rather dense; similar to J.
marginatus but with nodose leaves and more elongate inflorescences. Damp sandy ground or
shallow water; Grayson and Kaufman cos.; se and e TX w to Wichita Co. in Red River drainage
(Mahler 1988); scattered elsewhere in TX. Jun–Jul, rarely to Nov.

Juncus polycephalus Michx., (many-headed), FLAT-LEAF RUSH. Tufted perennial from
subrhizomatous base; similar to J. validus, but with smaller heads. Included based on citation of
vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se TX, scattered elsewhere. Summer.

Juncus scirpoides Lam., (Scirpus-like), NEEDLE-POD RUSH. Very similar to J. brachycarpus except
for capsules. Damp, sandy ground; in nc TX collected once at w edge of East Cross Timbers in
Johnson Co. (Mahler 1988), also Milam Co. near e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e TX, also
Edwards Plateau. Late May–Aug.

Juncus tenuis Willd., (slender), SLENDER RUSH, POVERTY RUSH, PATH RUSH. Tufted perennial 8–
30(–45) cm tall; panicle 3–6(–9) cm long, about 1/4–1/5 the total height of plant (in contrast to J.
bufonis). Moist sand in woods; Grayson Co.; mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Spring,
rarely summer.

Juncus texanus (Engelm.) Coville, (of Texas), TEXAS RUSH. Plant slender, 20–80 cm tall, freely rhi-
zomatous and tuber-bearing; capsules with slender, prolonged, exserted tip. Low ground; Bell,
Bosque, Collin, Coryell, Ellis, and Grayson cos.; Blackland Prairie and Grand Prairie; nc TX, s TX,
Edwards Plateau, and Trans-Pecos; endemic to TX. Jun–Jul. E

Juncus torreyi Coville, (for John Torrey, 1796–1873, coauthor with Asa Gray of “The Flora of
North America”), TORREY’S RUSH. Plant rhizomatous, 30–110 cm tall; rhizomes often tuber-bear-
ing; heads 8–10(–11) mm thick. Damp or wet ground; mainly Blackland Prairie s and w to w TX;
rare farther e in Red River drainage (Mahler 1988). Jun–Jul, sporadically to Oct.

Juncus validus Coville, (vigorous). Resembling J. torreyi but heads well-separated; rhizomes of-
ten very short or absent. Damp or wet ground. Jun–Oct.

1. Inflorescences mostly 2–5 cm long, of 6–15 heads; capsules tardily dehiscent             var. fascinatus
1. Inflorescences 5–25 cm long, of (12–)15–76 heads; capsules promptly completely dehiscent
                                                                                                 var. validus

var. fascinatus M.C. Johnst., (fascinating). Included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and
5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); in much of e 1/2 of TX; endemic to TX. E
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1185




                                                                                       Juncus torreyi [STE]

                                  Juncus texanus [EN1]




Juncus tenuis [GWO]




                                                                                          Juncus validus var. validus [GWO, SH3]



                                 Juncus validus var. fascinatus [HEA]




     Luzula bulbosa [SH3, STE]                                          Luzula echinata [GLE]
1186 LEMNACEAE

var. validus. ROUND-HEAD RUSH. Se and e TX w to Grayson and Tarrant cos.; also Edwards Pla-
teau and Panhandle.

                                       LUZULA WOODRUSH
Tufted perennials; leaves flat, grass-like, with pubescence; inflorescences terminal, of 5–10(–13)
usually simple branches, with 1–3 leaf-like bracts; flowers (in our species) in few-flowered
glomerules; stigmas much longer than styles; seeds 3, with whitish elaiosomes or caruncles (=
appendages used in dispersal by ants or other insects) ca. 1/3–2/3 length of seed.
AA genus of 115 species, cosmopolitan in distribution but especially in temperate Eurasia.
Handel (1978) presented experimental evidence that the seeds of some species are dispersed by
ants. (From Gramen Luzulae, or Luxulae, diminutive of Latin lux, light; a name given to one of
the species from its shining with dew)

1. Small bulb-like whitish structures (= swollen, reduced leaves) usually present on the rhizomes;
   glomerules (= flower clusters) cylindric; capsule usually exceeding perianth; elaiosome 0.9–1.3
   mm long, 1/2–2/3 length of seed ____________________________________________________ L. bulbosa
1. Small bulb-like structures not present on the rhizomes (but base of plant can be swollen); glom-
   erules subglobose or ovoid; perianth usually conspicuously exceeding capsule; elaiosome 0.5–
   0.6 mm long, ca. 1/3 length of seed                                                              L. echinata

Luzula bulbosa (A.W. Wood) Smyth, (bulbous), BULB WOODRUSH. Tufted perennial to 45 cm tall;
rhizomes slender with whitish, swollen, bulb-like structures (= reduced leaves) ca. 2–4 mm
thick; leaves few, 2–7 mm wide, long-hairy marginally; inflorescence branches usually erect or
ascending. Sandy soils in forests; Fannin Co. in Red River drainage (Talbot property); Hatch et
al. (1990) also cited vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2); mainly e TX. Spring. [L. campestris (L.) DC. var.
bulbosa A.W. Wood]

Luzula echinata (Small) F.J. Herm. var. mesochorea F.J. Herm., (sp.: prickley; var.: midland). Simi-
lar to L. bulbosa but more densely tufted; rhizomes knotty and base of plant sometimes swol-
len, but rhizomes without bulb-like structures; some of the inflorescence branches usually di-
vergent at right angles. Sandy soils; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly e TX. Spring. [L. campestris
(L.) DC. var. echinata (Small) Fernald & Wiegand]


                       LEMNACEAE DUCKWEED FAMILY
Very small or minute annual aquatics, floating free on or in the water, consisting of a flat or
solid body (called thallus, frond, or joint) a few mm or less across, not differentiated into stems
and leaves, solitary or in small clusters; new plants (= daughter fronds) chiefly produced asexu-
ally by budding, often remaining attached to the parent frond by a short stipe; flowering infre-
quent or at least infrequently observed; inflorescence with 1 or 2 staminate flowers of a single
stamen and 1 pistillate flower with a single pistil, produced in 2 lateral pouchs at frond base (in
Lemna and Spirodela) or in a cavity on frond surface (in Wolffia and Wolffiella); flowers minute,
imperfect, without perianth (a very minute bract may be present); fruit an urticle.
AA small (25 species in 4 genera) family of aquatics thought to be derived from the Araceae;
molecular studies link Lemna with Pistia (a free-floating member of the Araceae) (Duvall et al.
1993). Because of their huge numbers and rapid reproduction, duckweeds can have pronounced
influences on aquatic habitats (Hicks 1937); they are important as food for waterfowl and fish,
but can also become pests. Lemnaceae have also been used in wastewater treatment systems as
biological filters and the plants are sometimes harvested to make a high-protein feed for live-
stock (Tyrl et al. 1994). Due to their prolific asexual reproduction, Lemnaceae are being studied
                                                                                          LEMNA/LEMNACEAE 1187

by NASA as a possible food source for prolonged space voyages. The family is not well-collected
or well-studied in nc TX. All nc TX species are found on lakes, ponds, swamps, marshes, or
other standing water or stranded on mud; they are prominent chiefly in late summer and fall.
This easily recognized family contains the smallest known flowering plants, members of the
genus Wolffia. While easy to identify to genus, specific determination is often difficult. (sub-
class Arecidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: free-floating, very small or minute aquatics (larger plants
only a few mm in size).
REFERENCES: Thompson 1897; Hicks 1937; Wilson 1960a; Harrison & Beal 1964; McClure &
Alston 1966; Clark & Thieret 1968; den Hartog & van der Plas 1970; Landolt 1980, 1986;
Dahlgren et al. 1985.

1. Fronds with 1 or more roots, 2 mm long or longer, oblong to elliptic, ovate, obovate, or orbicular,
   not long-tapered to apex.
   2. Each frond with 1 root; fronds 2–5 mm long                                                       Lemna
   2. Each frond with several roots; fronds 2.5–10 mm long (Lemna size or much larger) ____________ Spirodela
1. Fronds rootless, EITHER < 1.4 mm long (pinhead size) OR fronds larger and narrowly lanceolate
   and distinctly long-tapered from a relatively broad base to a narrow apex.
   3. Fronds < 1.4 mm long, pinhead size, ± distinctly 3-dimensional, never flat except on the upper
      surface, solitary or usually at most only two fronds attached together, usually floating on the
      water surface _____________________________________________________________________ Wolffia
   3. Fronds 4–8.4 mm long, flat, membranous, (rarely solitary–)usually 2–many attached together,
      usually floating below the water surface _____________________________________________ Wolffiella


                                           LEMNA DUCKWEED
Fronds solitary or in clusters of a few, pale green, yellow-green, or green, sometimes with red-
dish purple pigmentation; base of the single root surrounded by a tubular sheath, not covered by
a membranous scale; 2 vegetative reproductive pouches per frond, these lateral near frond base.
AA cosmopolitan genus of 7 species (Landolt (1980) indicated 9–13 species). (Classical Greek
name for a water plant)
REFERENCES: Landolt 1975; Reveal 1990a.

1. Fronds with 3–5(–7) nerves, without OR with anthocyanin (= red or purple pigmentation) present;
   upper (= dorsal) surface of fronds with or without prominent protuberances (= papillae); includ-
   ing species widespread in nc TX.
   2. Fronds without any reddish purple pigmentation on either lower or upper surfaces; lower
      frond surface flat to slightly convex; root sheath with definite wings or appendages; root tips
      usually sharp-pointed; including species widespread in nc TX.
      3. Upper frond surface with only 1 papilla above the node (= point where root attaches on
         lower frond surface) and this one typically smaller than the one near the frond tip; wide-
         spread in nc TX _________________________________________________________ L. aequinoctialis
      3. Upper frond surface very often with 2–3 prominent papillae above the node larger than
         the one near the frond tip; rare in nc TX, reported only from Dallas Co. _________________ L. perpusilla
   2. Fronds typically with reddish purple pigmentation, at least on lower surface; lower frond sur-
      face slightly to strongly convex or gibbous; root sheath without wings or appendages; root
      tips mostly rounded; apparently rare in nc TX _________________________________________ L. obscura
1. Fronds with 1 nerve, without red or purple pigmentation; upper surface of fronds flat, smooth or
   with obscure median papillae, with no prominent papillae; rare in nc TX.
   4. Fronds very asymmetrical at the base 11/3–3 times as long as wide; nerve reaching at least
1188 LEMNACEAE/LEMNA

    3
      /4 of the distance from the node to the apex, usually distinct; plants sometimes submerged
       ___________________________________________________________________________ L. valdiviana
  4. Fronds nearly symmetrical at the base, 1–1 2/3 times as long as wide; nerve reaching at most
     2
       /3 of the distance from the node to the apex, sometimes indistinct; plants always floating on
     surface ________________________________________________________________________ L. minuta

Lemna aequinoctialis Welw., (of equinoctial zone, from equatorial regions). Fronds ovate to lan-
ceolate, 1–6.5 mm long, 0.8–4.5 mm wide, nearly symmetrical, light to medium green; lower sur-
face flat to slightly convex; wing of root sheath 1–2 1/2 times as long as wide. Bell, Brown, Dallas,
Denton, Grayson, and Tarrant cos.; throughout TX. [L. trinervis (Austin) Small] This is the com-
mon DUCKWEED in nc TX.

Lemna minuta Kunth, (minute, very small), LEAST DUCKWEED. Fronds ovate to lanceolate, 0.8–4
mm long, 0.5–2.5 mm wide, never pointed, light green; lower surface flat to slightly convex; root
sheath not winged. Dallas Co. (Landolt 1986); rare in TX; se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau and
Trans-Pecos. [L. minima Phil. ex Hegelm., L. minuscula Herter, L. valdiviana Phil. var. minima
Hegelm.] According to Landolt (1986), this species is sometimes difficult to distinguish from L.
valdiviana.

Lemna obscura (Austin) Daubs, (hidden). Fronds broadly ovate to suborbicular, 1 1/5–1 2/3 times
as long as wide, 1–3.5 mm long, 0.8–3 mm wide, green to yellowish green, typically with reddish
purple pigmentation, especially on lower surface; upper frond surface with a distinct papilla
near tip and several smaller indistinct papillae along midline; lower frond surface slightly to
strongly convex or gibbous. The Lemma gibba-minor–obscura-turionifera complex is quite
confusing. Landolt (1975) indicated that L. gibba occurs only to the w of nc TX. Based on incom-
plete comparative material, but using Landolt’s (1980) worldwide key to Lemna species and his
map (1975), Lamar Co. and Tarrant Co. pigmented populations with the lower frond surfaces
convex are apparently L. obscura. The name L. minor has been misapplied to this taxon in TX
in the past (e.g., Jones et al. 1997). Ox-bow lake in Lamar Co. in Red River drainage and Tarrant
Co. (Fort Worth Nature Center); Landolt (1975) indicated this species occurs along the Gulf
coast and northwards to n TX. [L. minor L. var. obscura Austin, L. minor of TX authors, not L.]

Landolt’s (1975) range map indicated that L. turionifera could also possibly occur in nc TX;
however, he (Landolt 1986) indicated the species is rare in TX and cited no nc TX localities. This
species would be identified as L. obscura by the key above. The following dichotomy to separate
the two is modified from Landolt (1980):

1. Fronds slightly to strongly convex or gibbous beneath; upper frond surface with papilla at apex
   bigger than others; not forming turions _________________________________________________ L. obscura
1. Fronds nearly flat beneath; upper frond surface with several papillae of ± equal size along the
   midline; forming small obovate to circular, rootless, dark green to brown turions under unfavor-
   able conditions which sink to the bottom of the water ___________________________________ L. turionifera

Lemma perpusilla Torr., (very weak and slender). Fronds ovate to lanceolate, 1–4 mm long, 0.8–3
mm wide, 1–1 2/3 times as long as wide, light green; apical and central papillae prominent; wing
of root sheath 2–3 times as long as wide. Dallas Co. (Landolt 1986); rare in TX; Landolt (1986)
gave only the Dallas locality; Hatch et al. (1990) indicated se and s TX.

Lemna valdiviana Phil., (of Valdivia, Chile), VALDIVIANA DUCKWEED, PALE DUCKWEED. Fronds
ovate to lanceolate, somewhat falcate to symmetrical except for the oblique base, 1–5 mm long,
0.6–3 mm wide, occasionally somewhat pointed, light green, flat to slightly biconvex; root
sheath not winged. Included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al.
(1990); according to Landolt (1986), rather frequent in TX except in the nw and s parts of the
state; however, we have not observed specimens from nc TX.
                                                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1189




                                                                            OVARY
                                                                                 STAMEN




                                                                                          NODE                TOP VIEW
                                                   DAUGHTER
                                                    FROND
                                                                                    DAUGHTER
                                                                                     FROND




                                  Lemna aequinoctialis [MAS, VGI]                                               Lemna minuta [MAS]


                                                                                                 NOTE
                                                                                                 THREE
                                                                                                 VEINS
                                                         SIDE VIEW AT
                                                          WATERLINE




                                                                                                          么

                                                                                                                    乆

              BELOW
                                                      ABOVE
                                                                                                                             么
                                   Lemna obscura [HEA]
                                                                                                         Lemna perpusilla [JEM, MAS]




 NOTE
SINGLE
  VEIN




         Lemna valdiviana [GWO, JEM]                          Spirodela polyrhiza [MAS]                       Spirodelia punctata [MAS]
1190 LEMNACEAE/SPIRODELA

                                   SPIRODELA DUCKMEAT
Fronds solitary or in clusters of a few, dark lustrous green on upper surface, usually reddish
purple on lower; 1 or more of the roots penetrating a membranous scale (= prophyllum); vegeta-
tive reproductive pouches 2 per frond, these lateral near frond base.
AA cosmopolitan genus of 4 species. Spirodela is the least reduced genus in the family; some-
times grown, using dairy waste water, as a substitute for alfalfa in animal food. (Greek: speira, a
cord or thread, and delos, evident or visible, from the roots)

1. Roots 4–20 per frond; fronds 3–10 mm long, orbicular-obovate to nearly ovate, almost as wide as
   long, the upper surface often with a conspicuous red dot near center, conspicuously several
   nerved; widespread in nc TX _______________________________________________________ S. polyrhiza
1. Roots 2–5 per frond; fronds 2.5–5 mm long, oblong-ovate to somewhat elliptic-reniform, dis-
   tinctly longer than wide, the upper surface usually without a conspicuous red dot, not conspicu-
   ously nerved; rare in nc TX _________________________________________________________ S. punctata

Spirodela polyrhiza (L.) Schleid., (many-rooted), COMMON DUCKMEAT, GREATER DUCKWEED.
Fronds usually ca. 3–6 mm wide; only 1(–3) of the roots penetrating the prophyllum. Dallas,
Denton, Grayson, Henderson, and Tarrant cos.; nearly throughout TX. This species is the largest
of the surface-floating duckweeds.

Spirodela punctata (G. Mey.) C.H. Thomps., (punctate, dotted). Closely resembling some Lemna
species in size and shape; fronds usually ca. 1–3 mm wide; all of the roots penetrating the
prophyllum. Denton Co. (mixed collection with Lemna aequinoctialis); rare in se and e TX. [S.
oligorhiza (Kurtz) Hegelm.] Native to South America, se Asia, Australia, and probably also s
Africa. Introduced as an aquarium plant (Godfrey & Wooten 1979). I

                                   WOLFFIA WATER-MEAL
Fronds extremely tiny, about the size of a pinhead, solitary or paired, with a single terminal
vegetative reproductive pouch; rarely flowering; when in large numbers the plants appear ±
like green scum on the water surface.
AA tropical to temperate genus of ca. 7 species. Wolffia species are the smallest known flower-
ing plants. Concentrations of 1–2 million plants per square yard of water surface can occur
(Hicks 1937). (Named for Johann Friedrich Wolff, 1788–1806, German botanist and physician
who wrote on Lemma in 1801)

1. Fronds usually ellipsoid or broadly ovoid, the upper surface flattened and often (but not always)
   with a raised, conical papilla in the center; frond epidermis often (but not always) with brownish
   pigmented cells (seen in dried material); cells of fronds progressively smaller and less inflated
   from lower to upper surface and fronds thus appearing darker near upper surface when viewed
   laterally in transmitted light ______________________________________________________ W. brasiliensis
1. Fronds usually ± globular, rarely ellipsoid, the upper surface strongly convex, not flattened and
   without a central papilla; frond epidermis without brownish pigmented cells; cells of fronds uni-
   formly inflated and fronds thus ± uniformly green when viewed laterally in transmitted light
     ___________________________________________________________________________ W. columbiana

Wolffia brasiliensis Wedd., (of Brazil). DOTTED WOLFFIA, POINTED WOLFFIA. Fronds 0.5–1.5 mm
long. Fannin, Co.; mainly se and e TX and Edwards Plateau. Even though w of the known range
of this species, many individuals from an isolated swamp/beaverpond complex near Tele-
phone in Fannin Co. (L. Talbot property), have definite epidermal pigmentation and papilla. [W.
papulifera C.H. Thomps., W. punctata Griseb.]
                                                                                    LILIACEAE 1191

Wolffia columbiana H. Karst., (of Colombia), COLOMBIA WOLFFIA, COMMON WOLFFIA. Fronds 0.1–
1.4 mm long; upper surface smooth or slightly roughened by a few minute papillae much
smaller than the usually central papilla often seen in W. braziliensis. Dallas and Lamar cos.; se
and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau.

                        WOLFFIELLA MUD-MIDGET, BOG-MAT
AA genus of ca. 7 species, mostly of tropical and warm areas of the Americas and Africa.
(Name a diminutive of Wolffia)

Wolffiella gladiata (Hegelm.) Hegelm., (sword-like). Fronds narrowly lanceolate, often falcate,
4–8.4 mm long, 0.5–1.4 mm wide at base, flat, membranous, distinctly long-tapered from a rela-
tively broad base to a narrow apex, usually 5–15 times as long as width at middle of frond,
(rarely solitary–)usually 2–many attached, sometimes forming star-like groups, usually float-
ing below the water surface; vegetative reproductive pouch solitary per frond; seldom flower-
ing. Falls Co. on e margin of nc TX (Landolt 1986); mainly se and e TX. [W. floridana (Donn.
Sm.) C.H. Thomps.]

Wolffiella lingulata (Hegelm.) Hegelm., (strap-shaped), occurs in se TX. This species can be dis-
tinguished by its fronds wide tongue-shaped or ovate, up to 1.5–4 times as long as wide,
rounded at the tips, solitary to 2(–4) attached.


                             LILIACEAE LILY FAMILY
                      (including AMARYLLIDACEAE)
Perennial herbs with bulb or rhizome, or with fleshy-fibrous or tuberous roots; leaves basal, al-
ternate, or whorled, sometimes sheathing or with narrow and petiole-like base, or with distinct,
tubular basal sheath and grass-like blade; flowers radially symmetrical or nearly so, solitary or
in racemes, panicles, corymbs, umbels, or head-like inflorescences, bractless, individually
bracted, or inflorescence with an involucre of sheathing bracts; perianth segments (= tepals) 6,
in one or two rows, separate or united; stamens 6; pistil 1; ovary superior or inferior; fruit a dry
capsule or fleshy berry.
AWe are following Cronquist (1981, 1988, 1993) and Kartesz (1994) in treating the Liliaceae
broadly to include the Alliaceae, Amaryllidaceae, Asparagaceae, Convallariaceae,
Hemerocallidaceae, Hyacinthaceae, and Hypoxidaceae, but not the Agavaceae or Smilacaceae.
The key to genera separates the species sometimes placed in the Amaryllidaceae from those in
a more restricted Liliaceae. Some authors recognize an Amaryllidaceae limited to those taxa
with inferior ovaries. The Liliaceae is quite diverse and has been divided into as many as 27
smaller families; however, Cronquist (1993) indicated that while there is significant variation
within the group, he has not been able to find a reasonable way of dividing that variation at the
familiy level. As treated here, the Liliaceae is a large (4,950 species in 288 genera), cosmopolitan
family important for its numerous ornamentals including Amaryllis, Hosta, Lilium (LILY) and
Tulipa (TULIP); the medically important Aloe is sometimes placed in the Liliaceae, while some
authorities segregate it into its own family, the Aloeaceae. Colchicum autumnale L. (AUTUMN
CROCUS), native from Europe to n Africa, is also medicinally important as the source of the al-
kaloid colchicine, used in treating gout. Some Liliaceae are edible (e.g., Allium, Asparagus),
but many are very toxic due to the presence of alkaloids. Liriope muscari (Decne.) L.H. Bailey,
(musk), (LILYTURF), with a dense raceme of small violet flowers usually exceeding the foliage,
and Ophiopogon japonicus (Thunb.) Ker Gawl., (of Japan), (MONDO-GRASS OR MONKEY-GRASS),
with racemes of off-white flowers not exceeding the foliage, are both widely cultivated, persist,
1192 LILIACEAE

and spread vegetatively in flower beds in nc TX. Family name from Lilium, LILY, a genus of 100
species native from the n temperate zone to the Philippines. (Latin form of Greek: leirion, name
for Madonna lily—Lilium candidum L.) (subclass Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: bulbous or rhizomatous, perennial herbs; flowers often
showy, with 6-parted petaloid perianth, 6 stamens (3 in the somewhat similar Iridaceae), and 3-
celled, superior or inferior ovary; fruit a capsule or berry.
REFERENCE: Dahlgren et al. 1985.

1. Perianth pilose, yellow; leaves narrowly linear, pilose (sometimes segregated as the
   Hypoxidaceae) _____________________________________________________________________ Hypoxis
1. Perianth and leaves not as above.
   2. Ovary inferior or superior; inflorescence with a basal involucre of sheathing bract or bracts;
      flowers solitary, umbellate or in head-like inflorescences (sometimes segregated as the
      Amaryllidaceae).
      3. Perianth bright red, to 40 mm long; leaves not present at flowering time; rarely escaped,
         introduced, ornamental species _____________________________________________________ Lycoris
      3. Perianth either not red OR if red then 10 mm long or less; leaves usually (but not always)
         present at flowering time; widespread native and introduced species.
         4. Ovary superior; perianth (including tube if present) up to 28 mm long (usually
            much less), white to yellow or variously colored, without a crown; perianth seg-
            ments without green tips.
            5. Filaments separate; perianth white to yellowish, pink or red, 10 mm or less long.
               6. Umbels with 5–30 or more flowers, or with bulblets; anthers oblong, ca 1 mm long;
                  plants with onion odor; flower stalks (= pedicels) within umbels of ± same length
                    _________________________________________________________________________ Allium
               6. Umbels with 4–12 flowers, without bulblets; anthers linear, ca. 2 mm long; plants
                  without onion odor; flower stalks within umbels of different lengths __________ Nothoscordum
            5. Filaments united; perianth lavender-blue or white with pale blue tinge, 16–28
               mm long.
               7. Flowers single, rarely 2, with 2 partly or wholly united bracts; perianth white
                  with pale blue tinge, the lobes with a darker central line and brownish tinge on
                  back ____________________________________________________________________ Ipheion
               7. Flowers 1–6, with 2 large and 2 small bracts; perianth, including lobes,
                  lavender-blue _____________________________________________________ Androstephium
         4. Ovary inferior; perianth at least 25 mm long OR with a crown OR perianth seg-
            ments with green tips; perianth white, yelllow, or orange-yellow.
            8. Perianth without a crown (= circle of tissue inside the corolla).
               9. Flowers nodding, usually 2–10; perianth segments tipped with green; introduced
                  species ________________________________________________________________ Leucojum
               9. Flowers not nodding, usually solitary; perianth segments not tipped with
                  green; native species.
                  10. Perianth white, with tube much more than 30 mm long ______________________ Cooperia
                  10. Perianth orange-yellow, with tube 25–30 mm long ________________________ Habranthus
            8. Perianth with a crown.
               11. Perianth tube 6–8 cm long; crown united with the filaments; perianth white ____ Hymenocallis
               11. Perianth tube < 3 cm long; crown not united with the filaments; all or part of peri-
                    anth usually yellow _____________________________________________________ Narcissus
   2. Ovary superior; inflorescence bractless or flowers individually bracted; flowers solitary, race-
      mose, paniculate, or corymbose (sometimes recognized as the Liliaceae in a stricter sense).
      12. Flowers urceolate (perianth segments united almost their whole length and slightly con-
                                                                                       ALETRIS/LILIACEAE 1193

        stricted at mouth), 3–6 mm long, dark blue with whitish teeth or rarely all white; flowering
        stalk to ca. 20 cm tall ____________________________________________________________ Muscari
    12. Flowers not urceolate, 6–120 mm long (except 3–4 mm long in the greenish white flow-
        ered Schoenocaulon), white to lavender-blue to variously colored; flowering stalk usually
        much more than 20 cm tall (except in Ornithogalum).
        13. Perianth segments united 1/2–2/3 their lengths; rare escape or persistent cultivated
             species ________________________________________________________________ Hyacinthus
        13. Perianth segments separate or united up to 1/4 their length; common native and natu-
             ralized species.
             14. Inflorescences scapose (= flowers on leafless stalks from the base of the plant);
                  plants without a leafy stem or leafy portion of stem very short, the leaves nearly all
                  basal; fruit a capsule.
                 15. Flowers solitary, leaves 2 ___________________________________________ Erythronium
                 15. Flowers in racemes, corymbs, or panicles; leaves more than 2.
                      16. Perianth segments very large, > 80 mm long, orangish ________________ Hemerocallis
                      16. Perianth segments smaller, < 30 mm long, greenish white, white, lavender-
                           blue, or yellow or orange-yellow.
                           17. Flowers greenish white; perianth segments ca. 3–4 mm long; plants both
                               with leaves mostly 4 mm or less wide AND with flowers sessile or nearly
                               so _____________________________________________________ Schoenocaulon
                           17. Flowers white, lavender-blue, yellow, or yellow-orange; perianth seg-
                               ments 6–20 mm long; plants either with leaves wider than 4 mm wide
                               OR flowers distinctly stalked OR both.
                               18. Perianth segments ca. 7 mm long, yellow or orange-yellow; flowers
                                   sessile or nearly so; plants without a bulb ___________________________ Aletris
                               18. Perianth segments 6–20 mm long, white or lavender-blue; flowers
                                   distinctly pedicellate; plants bulbous.
                                   19. Perianth segments white, bright green on back, usually with
                                        white margins; flower stalk usually 25 cm or less tall; lower
                                        pedicels often very long, to 8.5 cm long __________________ Ornithogalum
                                   19. Perianth segments lavender-blue or white, not green on back;
                                        flowering stalk often much more than 25 cm tall; lower pedicels
                                        usually < 3 cm long.
                                        20. Perianth segments lavender-blue or rarely white; anthers
                                            roughly orbicular, ca. 1 mm long _________________________ Camassia
                                        20. Perianth segments white; anthers elongate, oblong, ca. 2
                                            mm long __________________________________________ Zigadenus
             14. Inflorescences axillary (= from axils of the leaves); plants with an erect-arching leafy
                  stem or stem with numerous finely dissected branches; fruit a berry.
                  21. Leaves reduced to scales; main stem with numerous finely dissected branches;
                      ripe berry red; perianth 4–6 mm long ___________________________________ Asparagus
                  21. Leaves well-developed, lanceolate-elliptic to broadly elliptic, to 15 cm long and
                      7 cm wide; main stem unbranched; ripe berry blue-black; perianth 13–20 mm
                      long __________________________________________________________ Polygonatum


                             ALETRIS STAR-GRASS, COLIC-ROOT
AAn Asian and North American genus of 10 species including some cultivated as ornamen-
tals. (Greek: aleitris, a female slave who ground corn, referring to the apparent mealiness of the
perianth)
1194 LILIACEAE/ALLIUM

Aletris aurea Walter, (golden), YELLOW STAR-GRASS. Perennial, rhizomatous, scapose herb; leaves
flat, lanceolate, to 12 cm long; flowers in a spike-like raceme terminating a ± naked (a few small
remote bracts can be present) scape to 80 cm or more tall; pedicels 3 mm or less long; perianth
tubular, yellow or orange-yellow. Savannahs, boggy areas; included based on citation of vegeta-
tional area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX. May–Jul. m/77

                                ALLIUM ONION, GARLIC, LEEK
Bulbous perennials typically with odor of onion or garlic, our species glabrous; leaves with
closed, tubular, basal sheath and slender blade; inflorescence subtended by a spathe that di-
vides into 1–3 bracts; flowers white to pink, reddish pink, or purplish, or replaced by bulbils;
perianth of 6 similar, ± free segments (= tepals); fruit a capsule.
AA n hemisphere genus of ca. 690 species ranging from Eurasia to Africa, Sri Lanka, and
Mexico. It includes many species cultivated as ornamentals and for food including ONION, GAR-
LIC, SHALLOT, LEEK, and CHIVES; placed by some authorities in the Amaryllidaceae or the
Alliaceae (e.g., Dahlgren et al. 1985). Allium species contain sulfur-containing compounds simi-
lar to those found in the unrelated mustard family (Blackwell 1990); cows grazing on wild on-
ions are known to give onion-flavored milk and butter (Cheatham & Johnston 1995); while
generally edible, gastroenteritis in children or other problems can result from excessive con-
sumption of some species (Lampe & McCann 1985; Cheatham & Johnston 1995). According to
Block (1985), when an ONION or GARLIC bulb is cut, low-molecular-weight organic molecules
that incorporate sulfur atoms are released. These compounds have a number of biological ef-
fects: they are tear-inducing (= lacrimatory; the tear-inducing substance can undergo hydroly-
sis to form sulfuric acid); certain of the compounds are antibacterial or antifungal; others in-
hibit blood from clotting. (The ancient Latin name of the garlic, from Celtic: all, hot or pungent)
REFERENCES: Fraser 1939; Ownbey 1950b; Ownbey & Aase 1955; Davies 1992; Howard 1994;
Mathew 1996; Mes et al. 1997 [1998].

1. Leaf blades cylindrical, hollow; flowering stalk up to more than 1 m tall _________________________ A. cepa
1. Leaf blades flat, folded, or concave; flowering stalk usually 0.5(–0.9) m or less tall (except taller in
   A. sativum).
   2. Umbels with bulbils, often with few or no flowers; the few flowers, if present, rarely producing
      capsules or seeds.
      3. Flowering stems naked above the subbasal leaves, usually 0.5(–0.9) m or less tall; bulb coats
         (base of leaves) with fibers that persist as a conspicuous net-like structure enclosing the
         bulbs; leaf blades 1–5 mm wide; widespread native species ____________ A. canadense var. canadense
      3. Flowering stems with leaves nearly to middle, often 0.5–1.8 m or more tall; bulb coats lack-
         ing fibers that persist as a conspicuous net-like structure enclosing the bulbs; leaf blades 5–
         24(–40) mm wide; persisting or escaped introduced species.
         4. Underground bulb usually with ca. 2–few main cloves and producing numerous bulb
            lets from the base, the bulblets small (ca. 1 cm long), yellowish or brownish, helmet-shaped
            or subhemispherical, and typically stalked; stamens equaling or usually slightly exerted
            beyond the perianth segments; umbels usually large, (3–)5–10 cm in diam. _______ A. ampelopresum
         4. Underground bulb without small bulblets, but usually with 5–18+ similar-sized
            large bulblets (= cloves); stamens included or just equaling perianth segments; umbels
            usually 5 cm or less in diam. ___________________________________________________ A. sativum
   2. Umbels without bulbils; flowers producing capsules and seeds.
      5. Plants 25–180 cm tall, but typically > 50 cm tall; leaves 5–20(–40) mm wide; persisting or
         escaped introduced species ______________________________________________ A. ampelopresum
      5. Plants 7–90 cm tall, but typically < 50 cm; leaves 1–5(–7) mm wide; widespread native species.
                                                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1195




         DORSAL VIEW




                   LONGITUDINAL
                     SECTOIN




                                                                           LATERAL VIEWS


                            Wolffia brasiliensis [GWO, MIB]                                              Wolffia columbiana [GWO, MIB]




        Wolffiella gladiata [GWO]



                                                              Aletris aurea [co1]




                                                                                                       Allium ampeloprasum [GLE]




Allium canadense var. canadense [BB2]                     Allium canadense var. mobilense [BB2]
1196 LILIACEAE/ALLIUM

      6. Bulb coats lacking fibers that persist as a conspicuous net-like structure enclosing the
         bulbs; perianth segments deep pink; flowering late summer and fall _________________ A. stellatum
      6. Bulb coats with fibers that persist as a conspicuous net-like structure enclosing the
         bulbs; perianth segments pink, lavender, purplish red, or white; flowering in spring.
         7. Perianth segments not remaining spreading after flowering, either shriveling or if per-
            sistent, then urceolate; involucral bracts with 3–7 nerves (spathe usually divided into
            2–3 separate or partly united involucral bracts).
            8. Perianth campanulate or urceolate-campanulate, ultimately withering some-
               what and exposing the capsule, the segments 4–7 mm long; net-like structure
               enclosing bulbs fine or only moderately coarse-meshed.
               9. Perianth usually pinkish or lilac.
                  10. Pedicels filiform (= thread-like); plants slender; leaf blades narrower than flow-
                       ering stem, 0.3–2 mm wide; flowers ± scentless; se and e TX w to East Cross-
                       Timbers __________________________________________ A. canadense var. mobilense
                  10. Pedicels stouter; plants more robust; leaf blades narrower to broader than
                       flowering stem, 0.5–7 mm wide; flowers with sweet hyacinth scent; Blackland
                       Prairie w to Rolling Plains _________________________ A. canadense var. hyacinthoides
               9. Perianth usually white (rarely pink) ___________________________ A. canadense var. fraseri
            8. Perianth urceolate, permanently enclosing the capsule, the segments 5–11 mm long;
               net-like structure enclosing bulbs usually very coarse.
               11. Bulbs at flowering time with a cluster of short-stalked basal bulblets; perianth
                   segments 5–7 mm long, white with pinkish midribs, fading pink; pedicels ca. 2
                   times- the length of perianth in full flower ________________________________ A. runyonii
               11. Bulbs at flowering time without basal bulblets; perianth segments deep rose
                   color, fading purple, 7–11 mm long; pedicels ca. equal in length to perianth in
                   full flower _________________________________________________________ A. perdulce
         7. Perianth segments remaining spreading after flowering, becoming dry, papery
            and rigid; involucral bracts usually 1-nerved (spathe usually divided into 2–3 separate
            or partly united involucral bracts) ________________________________________ A. drummondii

Allium ampeloprasum L., (onion of the vineyard), WILD LEEK. Flowering stem 45–200 cm tall,
sheathed below, with leaves withering by flowering time; rounded parent bulb with many yel-
lowish bulblets; leaves flat, 30–60 cm long, 15–24(–40) mm wide; umbels 5–10 cm wide; flowers
very many, often more than 100 to up to 500 per umbel, white to pink or reddish pink, some-
times with bulbils. Weedy areas; Grayson Co. (extensive roadside colony), also, the map in
Cheatham and Johnston (1995) showed 2 nc TX localities; scattered in e 1/2 of TX. Summer. Na-
tive of Europe, n Africa, and Asia. Allium porrum L., LEEK, probably derived from A.
ampeloprasum, is also cultivated and probably persists locally. It differs in having the bulb but
poorly developed and bulblets few. It is cultivated for the edible fleshy leaf sheaths. Stanford
(1971) reported A. porrum from Hamilton Co. I

Allium canadense L., (of Canada), WILD ONION. Flowering stalk 10–50 cm tall; leaves 1–5(–7) mm
wide; flowers usually few or none, intermixed with bulblets and green sprouts, or many and
without bulblets or sprouts; perianth white to pink or lavender. The key to varieties of A.
canadense is included in the key to Allium species. In large amounts, this plant has caused
death in cattle (Kingsbury 1964); gastroenteritis has been reported in children (Lampe &
McCann 1985). 

var. canadense. CANADA GARLIC, WILD GARLIC, WILD ONION. Flowering stalk 15–50 cm tall; leaf
blades 1–5 mm wide; perianth segments when present 4–7 mm long, white to pink. Sandy open
woods, fields, roadsides, other open areas; Falls, Henderson, Hopkins, Hunt, and Lamar cos; se
and e TX w to East Cross Timbers. Mar–May. [Allium acetabulum (Raf.) Shinners]
                                                                             ALLIUM/LILIACEAE 1197

var. fraseri Ownbey, (for John Fraser, 1750–1811, Scottish collector in North America). Flowering
stalk 20–50 cm tall; leaf blades 1–7 mm wide; perianth segments 4–7 mm long, white (rarely
pink). Rocky soils, woods or open areas; Post Oak Savannah w to Rolling Plains and Edwards
Plateau. Apr–May. [A. fraseri (Ownbey) Shinners]

var. hyacinthoides (Bush) Ownbey & Aase, (hyacinth-like). Flowering stalk 15–30(–40) cm tall;
leaf blades 0.5–7 mm wide; umbels many-flowered; flowers fragrant; perianth segments 5–7
mm long, pink, thin. Calcareous prairies or infrequently in sandy soils, in sun or shade; Black-
land Prairie w to edge of Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau, mostly to the w of var. mobilense.
Late Mar–Apr. [A. hyacinthoides Bush]

var. mobilense (Regel) Ownbey, (of Mobile, Alabama). Flowering stalk 10–30(–50) cm tall; bulb
at base of plant sometimes with 1 or 2 bulblets (not in other vars.); leaf blades 0.3–2 mm wide;
flowers many, scentless; perianth segments 4–7 mm long, pink (rarely white). Sandy or rocky
soils, rarely on limestone or clay, woods and prairies; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. Apr–mid-May. [A. mobilense Regel]

var. ecristatum (M.E. Jones) Ownbey, (not crested), is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational
area 4 (Fig. 2) but apparently occurs only to the s of nc TX (Ownbey & Aase 1955). It can be
distinguished from the similar var. hyacinthoides by its few (5–25)-flowered umbels and thicker
perianth segments.

Allium cepa L., (Latin for onion), ONION. Flowering stalk to > 1 m tall; leaves cylindrical with
groove on inner surface; pedicels many times longer than flowers; perianth whitish green. Cul-
tivated, persisting, and escaped?; included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2)
by Hatch et al. (1990), also s TX. May–Jun. Native of w Asia. I

Allium drummondii Regel, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish botanist
and collector in North America), DRUMMOND’S ONION, PRAIRIE ONION. Flowering stalk 7–30 cm
tall; leaves 1–3(–5) mm wide; umbels with 10–25 flowers; perianth segments 6–9 mm long, white
to pink, lavender, or purple-red (rarely greenish yellow); pedicels ca. 6–18 mm long. Sandy or
gravelly, often limestone soils; nearly throughout TX. Mar–May.

Allium perdulce S.V. Fraser, (very sweet). Flowering stalk7–25 cm tall; leaves 1–2 mm wide; flow-
ers sweet-scented; umbel 5–25-flowered; perianth rose-purple. Sandy or gravelly prairies; Ar-
cher, Bosque, and Callahan cos., also Clay and Palo Pinto cos. (Ownbey & Aase 1955), w part of
nc TX w to Plains Country and s to Edwards Plateau. Mar–early Apr.

Allium runyonii Ownbey, (for H. Everett Runyon, 1881–1968, TX botanist and photographer),
RUNYON’S ONION. Flowering stalk 10–35 cm tall; leaves 1–4 mm wide; perianth segments 5–7
mm long, white with pinkish midribs, fading pink. Sandy soils; included based on citation of
vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); Ownbey and Aase (1955) gave the dis-
tribution as Rio Grande Plains in s TX; endemic to TX. Mar. The cluster of stalked bulblets typi-
cally present at the base of the bulb is distinctive among the nc TX species of Allium. E

Allium sativum L., (cultivated or sown), GARLIC. Plant stout; bulb coats membranous, silky
white or pink; bulb of 5–15(+) similar-sized bulblets (= cloves); leaves 6–12, flat, 5–15 mm wide,
sheathing the stem; flowers usually aborting before anthesis; perianth segments usually whit-
ish green or pinkish. Cultivated in nc TX and probably persisting and escaping?; included be-
cause of likelihood of encounter in abandoned garden spots; May–Jul. Cultigen derived from an
Old World species; cultivated since ancient times, probably 3,000 B.C. or earlier; bulbs were
found in the tomb of Tutankhamen; used medicinally, in cooking, and worn around the neck to
supposedly ward off evil spirits, trolls, and vampires (Rose & Strandtmann 1986; Mabberley
1987; Mathew 1996). I
1198 LILIACEAE/ANDROSTEPHIUM

Allium stellatum Nutt. ex Ker Gawl., (star-like), PRAIRIE ONION, WILD ONION, PINK WILD ONION.
Flowering stalk 20–70 cm tall; leaves 1–5 mm wide; perianth segments 5–8 mm long, deep pink.
Prairies, usually in calcareous soils; Cooke and Tarrant cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); in TX
only in nc part of the state. Jul–Oct.

Allium texanum T.M. Howard, (of Texas). This species was named by Howard (1990) with the
type from Bosque Co. and another nc TX collection from Comanche Co. He indicated that “it is
distinguished from the closely related A. fraseri [A. canadense var. fraseri] in flowering later,
having broadly spiraled, gla[u]cous foliage, taller, more robust habits, larger umbels with flow-
ers having green ovaries, and having membranous coated bulbs or with non-persisting, poorly
developed reticulated bulb coats. Allium texanum differs from A. canadense in its mostly
membranous-coated bulbs, floriferous, rather than bulbil-bearing, umbels, and in the indi-
vidual floral form.” We have seen no specimens but based on the description assume it is part of
the A. canadense complex, possibly a variety of that species. Because of our unfamiliarity with
this taxon and our hesitancy to add to nomenclatural complexity by treating it as a var. of A.
canadense, we are simply including it as a note.

                            ANDROSTEPHIUM FUNNEL-LILY
AAn American genus of 2 species; cultivated as ornamentals. (Greek: andros, male, and
stephanos, a crown, in reference to the fused filaments)

Androstephium coeruleum (Scheele) Greene, (dark blue), BLUE FUNNEL-LILY. Glabrous perennial
from a fibrous-coated corm, gray-green, 6–25 cm tall; leaves basal, slender, longer than the scape
(= flowering stem), exserted from a broad, loose, thinly papery, sheathing bract; scape to 25 cm
tall, usually < 15 cm; flowers 1–6 in an umbel-like cluster subtended by membranous bracts,
with strong spicy-sweet scent; perianth lavender-blue, 16–24 mm long; filaments ± united to
form a tube; capsules ca. 15 mm long. Prairies; Blackland Prairie (on the Austin Chalk) w to
Edwards Plateau and Rolling Plains. Late Mar–mid-Apr.

                                         ASPARAGUS
AAn Old World genus of 130–140 species. (The ancient Greek name)

Asparagus officinalis L., (used in medicine), GARDEN ASPARAGUS. Rhizomatous, dioecious, gla-
brous perennial usually 1–3 m tall; stems with many very finely dissected branches; leaves re-
duced to scales; photosynthesis carried out by the stem tissue; flowers axillary, 1–2(–3) per axil,
on jointed pedicels, greenish yellow, ca. 4–6 mm long; fruit a red berry ca. 1 cm in diam. Widely
cultivated and escapes to sandy areas; Cooke, Grayson, and McLennan cos.; mainly e 1/2 of TX.
May–Jul. Native of the coasts of Europe, n Africa, and Asia. Grown since time of the ancient
Greeks for the edible young spring shoots (Mabberley 1997). Mature asparagus has caused poi-
soning in cattle (Kingsbury 1964); the young plants can cause dermatitis and the fruits are sus-
pected of poisoning humans (Schmutz & Hamilton 1979); there are steroid saponins which are
molluscicidal (Mabberley 1997).  I

                              CAMASSIA WILD-HYACINTH
AA genus of 6 species, 5 in North America (1 e U.S., 4 disjunct to w North America—Wood
1970), 1 South American. Some species (e.g., C. quamash (Pursh) Greene–CAMASH or QUAMASH of
Native Americans) were extensively used as food by Native Americans in the nw U.S.
(Kindscher 1987); some also are cultivated as ornamentals. Camassia is sometimes segregated
with similar genera (e.g., Hyacinthus, Muscari, Ornithogalum) into the Hyacinthaceae
(Dahlgren et al. 1985). (From the Native American name, quamash or camass)
REFERENCES: Gould 1942; Ranker & Schnabel 1986.
                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1199




                                Allium drummondii [BB2]

                                                                              Allium perdulce [TKA]




      Allium cepa [GLE]




                                   Allium sativum [ANO]                    Allium stellatum [HO1]




Allium runyonii [HEA]
                          Androstephium coeruleum [RYD]                  Asparagus officinalis [LAM]
1200 LILIACEAE/COOPERIA

Camassia scilloides (Raf.) Cory, (resembling the genus Scilla), WILD-HYACINTH, EASTERN CAMASS,
ATLANTIC CAMASSIA, CAMASS, CAMASS-LILY, MEADOW-HYACINTH, MEADOW QUILL, SIKO. Bulbous
perennial 15–85 cm tall; leaves crowded at base of stem, their bases clasping and surrounded by
a sheathing, somewhat papery bract; inflorescence an elongating erect raceme; flowers sweet-
scented; perianth segments 10–14 mm long, lavender-blue, rarely white; fruit a capsule. Open
woods and prairies; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Apr–May. The
bulb is edible and was an important food source for Native Americans and early settlers; how-
ever, it resembles that of the potentially fatal Zigadenus nuttallii (DEATH CAMAS) (Ajilvsgi 1984;
Kindscher 1987). m/81

                                     COOPERIA RAIN-LILY
Plants glabrous, often flowering without leaves, 8–35 cm tall; flowers erect, solitary, subtended by
a conspicuous bract; flowering stems appearing quickly after rains; perianth white, sometimes
pink-tinted outside, salverform, with an elongate tube and an open limb of similar sepal and
petal lobes; flower sessile or short-pedicelled; ovary borne inside the involucre; capsule trilocular.
AA small American genus of ca. 6–7 species (Correll & Johnston 1970) sometimes lumped
into Zephyranthes (e.g., Mabberley 1997) and previously placed in the Amaryllidaceae. We are
following Kartesz (1994), Jones et al. (1997), and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) in maintaining
Cooperia as a distinct genus. (Named for Daniel Cooper, ?1817–1842, an English botanist)

1. Flower sessile, ovary borne at base of subtending bract; perianth tube (from base to where peri-
   anth begins to widen) greatly elongate (3.4–18 cm long); style > 40 mm long _____________ C. drummondii
1. Flower short-pedicelled, the ovary borne 1/3–1/2 way above base of subtending bract; perianth
   tube shorter (2.2–4 cm long); style < 35 mm long ____________________________________ C. pedunculata

Cooperia drummondii Herb., (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish bota-
nist and collector in North America), CEBOLLETA, RAIN-LILY. Spring leaves 1–3(–5) mm wide; peri-
anth with nearly flat limb about 1/4 as long as the long, slender, pedicel-like basal tube, the
lobes 12–20 mm long, obtuse. Prairies, roadsides, often on thin soils over limestone; se and e TX
w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct, typically after a rain. [Zephyranthes
brazosensis (Herb.) Traub, Zephyranthes herbertiana D. Dietr.] The flowers open in the late af-
ternoon or evening (Kirkpatrick 1992).

Cooperia pedunculata Herb., (peduncled, stalked, or footed), GIANT RAIN-LILY, PRAIRIE RAIN-LILY,
WHITE RAIN-LILY, WIDE-LEAF RAIN-LILY. Spring leaves 4–10 mm wide; perianth with broadly fun-
nelform limb about 1/2 or more as long as the narrowly cylindric basal tube, the lobes 25–30
mm long, with an abrupt small point. Rocky or sandy soils, prairies, roadsides, open woods;
Coryell Co., also McLennan Co. (Mahler 1988); s part of nc TX sw to Edwards Plateau, also se
and e TX. Apr–Jul, typically a few days after heavy rains. [Zephyranthes drummondii D. Don.]
According to Wills and Irvin (1961), the flowers “… open slowly around dusk or earlier on cloudy
days, the lobes gradually spreading during the night, and appearing fully expanded the next
morning. Ordinarily each flower lasts only one day, turning pale pink before withering, but in
dull weather withering may not occur until the second day.” m/85

                  ERYTHRONIUM DOG-TOOTH-VIOLET, FAWN-LILY
Perennial from deep bulb; runners or stolons present or absent; leaves of flowering plants 2, of
sterile plants 1; inflorescence usually a 1-flowered scape; perianth segments 6, in ours white to
tinged with varying shades of blue and red, 2–4 cm long; 3 inner perianth segments with a yel-
low spot at base, stamens 6; pistil superior, 3-carpellate; capsule obovate.
                                                                            HABRANTHUS/LILIACEAE 1201

AA genus of ca. 20 species of temperate North America and Eurasia; some have edible corms;
a number are cultivated as ornamentals. The following key is from Robertson (1966); all nc TX
specimens we have observed had mottled leaves; some of these had the mature fruits resting on
the ground and some were from prairies; Robertson (1966) indicated that specimens from near
Fort Worth were definitely E. mesochoreum. Taylor and Taylor (1994) recognized the two taxa as
varieties of E. albidum. Further work on this complex is needed before specimens can be classi-
fied with confidence; we are not fully convinced there are actually two different species in nc
TX. (Greek name for the purplish-flowered European species, from erythros, red)
REFERENCES: Harper 1945; Ireland 1957; Robertson 1966.

1. Perianth segments reflexed in full bloom; leaves mottled; mature fruits erect to nodding at
   maturity, held off ground; moist woods ________________________________________________ E. albidum
1. Perianth segments spreading to at most half-reflexed in full bloom; leaves usually not mottled;
   mature fruits resting on ground; prairies, pastures, dry open woods ____________________ E. mesochoreum

Erythronium albidum Nutt., (white), WHITE DOG-TOOTH-VIOLET, WHITE FAWN-LILY, TROUT-LILY.
Leaves abruptly attenuated, mottled, flat to half-folded; perianth reflexed; sterile forms with long
runners with a new bulb forming at runner tip; chromosome number 2n = 44. Usually moist
woods; Collin, Cooke, Dallas, Grayson, and Tarrant cos., also Comanche (HPC), Hunt, Kaufman,
Red River, and Rockwall (Mahler 1988) cos.; e TX w to nc TX. Feb–Mar. The common name
TROUT LILY refers to the leaf mottling which resembles the speckling on a trout (Ajilvsgi 1984).

Erythronium mesochoreum Knerr, (midland). Leaves gradually attenuated, not mottled, condu-
plicate or occasionally only half-folded; perianth spreading; sterile forms usually without run-
ners, a new bulb forming at base of old one; chromosome number 2n = 22. Prairies and dry
woods; Bell, Bosque, Coryell, Dallas, Grayson, Rockwall, and Tarrant cos. (Mahler 1988); nc TX
and Edwards Plateau. (Jan–)Feb–Mar. [E. albidum var. coloratum Sterns, E. albidum var.
mesochoreum (Knerr) Rickett] Churchill and Bloom in Churchill (1986b) indicated that ants
eat the white oil body attached to the seeds and apparently act as dispersal agents. m/89

                                 HABRANTHUS COPPER-LILY
AA temperate South American genus of 10 species including some cultivated as ornamentals;
previously placed in the Amaryllidaceae. (Greek: habros, graceful, and anthos, a flower)
REFERENCE: Holms & Wells 1980.

Habranthus tubispathus (L’Hér.) Traub, (tube-spathed), ATAMOSCO-LILY, STAGGER-GRASS. Leaves
basal; scape to ca. 30 cm tall, with 1 flower; perianth long-funnelform with gradually tapering
base, 25–30 mm long, orange-yellow, sometimes with reddish tinge on outer surface; flower on
pedicel about twice as long as the subtending involucral bract; ovary borne above the bract;
capsule subglobose, ca. 15 mm wide. Moist open areas; Milam Co., also yard weed in Tarrant Co.,
also McLennan and Williamson cos. (Holmes & Wells 1980); s part of nc TX to se and s TX and
Edwards Plateau. Jul–Oct, after rains. [H. texanus (Herb.) Herb. ex Steud., Zephyranthes texana
Hook.] Holmes and Wells (1980) proposed that this species is native to South America and was
introduced in the U.S. in the late 1600s or early 1700s possibly by Spanish missionaries. I

                                   HEMEROCALLIS DAY-LILY
AAn ornamentally important genus of ca. 15 species occurring from c Europe to China and
Japan; many cultivars are of hybrid origin. Some authorities (e.g., Dahlgren et al. 1985) segregate
the genus as the Hemerocallidaceae. (Greek: hemera, a day, and callus, beauty, referring to the
flowers lasting one day)
REFERENCES: Bailey 1930a; Erhardt 1992.
1202 LILIACEAE/HYACINTHUS

Hemerocallis fulva L., (tawny, dull yellow-brown), TAWNY DAY-LILY, ORANGE DAY-LILY. Perennial
from fleshy roots with tuberous swellings; leaves basal, to 1 m long; scape 0.7–1.5 m tall; flowers
several, not fragrant; perianth large and showy, usually tawny orange, 8.5–12 cm long, broadly
campanulate to funnelform with cylindrical tube; perianth lobes spreading to slightly re-
curved; margins of inner perianth lobes undulate; fruit a capsule; seeds usually not maturing.
Widely cultivated, long persists, and sometimes escapes; Lamar Co., also Grayson Co. (G. Diggs,
pers. obs.). Native of e Asia. The dried flowers are used to flavor food in China and Japan
(Mabberley 1987). I

Hemerocallis lilioasphodelus L., (lily and Asphodelus, another genus of Liliaceae), is another
cultivated species; this Eurasian native can be distinguished by its bright yellow fragrant flow-
ers and the margins of the perianth lobes plane (not undulate). I

                                 HYACINTHUS HYACINTH
AA genus of 3 species native from w and c Asia to the Mediterranean; sometimes segregated
with similar genera (e.g., Camassia, Muscari, Ornithogalum) into the Hyacinthaceae (Dahlgren
et al. 1985). (The Greek name)

Hyacinthus orientalis L., (oriental), HYACINTH, GARDEN HYACINTH. Bulbous perennial 10–30 cm
tall; leaves crowded at base, ± clasping and sheathing; flowers sweet-scented, short-pedicelled,
in an erect, spike-like raceme; perianth narrowly campanulate with recurved lobes, violet-blue
to white, rosy, or rarely yellowish. In 1893 Reverchon wrote that a wild strain of this had self-
sown and escaped from his garden in Dallas, maintaining itself for several years (Mahler 1988).
Modern cultivated varieties sometimes persist about old farms and gardens (Hunt Co.), but are
not known to produce seed. Late Feb–Mar. Native of the e Mediterranean region. All parts of the
plant, but especially the bulb, can cause poisoning in humans and livestock; toxicity is appar-
ently due to alkaloids such as lycorine (Stephens 1980; Spoerke & Smolinske 1990).  I

                 HYMENOCALLIS WHITE SPIDER-LILY, SPIDER-LILY
Glabrous perennials from a large bulb; leaves basal, strap-like; inflorescence an umbel, usually
with 6–9 flowers, terminating a naked scape, subtended by 2 or more usually scarious bracts;
flowers white, extremely showy, sweet scented; perianth with a long slender tube and linear to
narrowly lanceolate, spreading segments; large, conspicuous, cup-like crown (= corona) present
and connecting the bases of the filaments; fruit a few-seeded capsule.
AA genus of 30–40 species of warm areas of the Americas; a number are cultivated as orna-
mentals; previously placed in the Amaryllidaceae.  The bulbs of some species are poisonous
due to the presence of alkaloids such as lycorine and tazettine (Lampe & McCann 1985;
Spoerke & Smolinske 1990). (Greek: hymen, a membrane, and callos, beauty, presumably refer-
ring to the crown)
REFERENCES: Shinners 1951d; Sealy 1954.

1. Free portion of filaments 23–35 mm long; crown 33–40 mm long; larger perianth segments
   usually > 5 mm wide; leaves 18–42 mm wide ________________________________________ H. caroliniana
1. Free portion of filaments (above attachment to crown) 20 mm or less long; crown 25–35 mm
   long; larger perianth segments usually 5 mm or less wide; leaves usually < 20(–40) mm
   wide ___________________________________________________________________________ H. liriosme

Hymenocallis caroliniana (L.) Herb., (of Carolina). Plant 35–53 cm tall; perianth segments white,
greenish white below, to 10 cm long; crown 3.3–4 cm long. Wet sandy areas; included based on
citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX. Mar–May(–Jul).
                                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1203




   Camassia scilloides [BB2]                              Cooperia drummondii [BB2]

                                                                                                  Cooperia pedunculata [CUR]




Erythronium albidum [RYD]                        Erythronuim mesochoreum [STE]                  Habranthus tubispathus [CUR]




                          Hemerocallis fulva [BT2, GAR]                                         Hyacinthus orientalis [NIC]
1204 LILIACEAE/HYPOXIS

Hymenocallis liriosme (Raf.) Shinners, (lily-smell or fragrant lily), WESTERN SPIDER-LILY, FRA-
GRANT SPIDER-LILY. Plant 35–100 cm tall; perianth extremely showy, to ca. 20 cm in diam., snowy
white, tinged with yellow in the center, yellowish or greenish on tube; tube 6–8 cm long. Stream
bottoms and ditches, sometimes in shallow water; Kaufman and Red River cos. (Correll &
Johnston 1970); se and e TX w to Blackland Prairie. Late Mar–May, occasionally to Jul. [H. eulae
Shinners] m/93

                     HYPOXIS YELLOW STAR-GRASS, GOLDSTAR
AA genus of 150 species of tropical and warm areas of the world, especially the s hemisphere.
It is sometimes segregated as the Hypoxidaceae (e.g., Dahlgren et al. 1985; Jones et al. 1997) or
placed in the Amaryllidaceae. (Old name taken over by Linnaeus; either from Greek: hypoxys,
somewhat acidic, or Greek: hypo, beneath, and oxys, sharp, alluding to the base of the capsule)
REFERENCES: Brackett 1923; Herndon 1992.

Hypoxis hirsuta (L.) Coville, (hairy), YELLOW STAR-GRASS, COMMON GOLDSTAR. Perennial from a
small corm; leaves basal, slender, grass-like, with closed, tubular basal sheath; several additional
papery sheaths present outside the leaves, the old ones disintegrating and disappearing; flower-
ing stems 6–20 cm tall, from half as long as the leaves to almost as long; flowers usually 2–4, in
an umbel-like inflorescence with a pair of opposite, thread-like bracts at its base; perianth yel-
low, greenish and pubescent outside, nearly rotate when fully open; perianth segments 6, 6–12
mm long, up to 18 mm with age, lanceolate to elliptic; stamens 6; pistil 1; ovary inferior; capsule
2–6 mm long. Open woods, prairies, and roadsides; se and e TX w to Dallas, Grayson, and Wise
cos., also Montague Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.), also Edwards Plateau. Late Mar–early May. [H.
rigida Chapm., H. leptocarpa Engelm.]

                                   IPHEION SPRING-STAR
AA South American genus of 10 species of onion-scented herbs (Mabberley 1987) sometimes
treated in the genus Tristagma (e.g., Mabberley 1997); previously placed by some authorities in
the Amaryllidaceae or Alliaceae. (Greek: origin obscure)

Ipheion uniflorum (Lindl.) Raf., (one-flowered), SPRING-STAR. Glabrous perennial, 7–20 cm tall,
with onion odor; leaves basal, with long, closed, tubular sheath of thin, scarious texture, and
slender green blade; scape with 2 partly or wholly united bracts above the middle, terminated
by 1(–2) flowers; perianth 20–28 mm long, white with pale blue tinge, the lobes with darker
central line and brownish tinge on back; filaments ± united to form a tube. Cultivated and es-
caping; Blackland Prairie (Kaufman Co.) and Edwards Plateau. Feb–Mar. Native of Argentina
and Uruguay. [Brodiaea uniflora (Graham) Engl.] I

                                 LEUCOJUM SNOWFLAKE
AA genus of 10 species ranging from Europe to Morocco and Iran; related to Galanthus; previ-
ously placed in the Amaryllidaceae. (Greek: leucos, white, and ion, a violet, in reference to the
delicate fragrance)
REFERENCE: Webb 1980.

Leucojum aestivum L., (summer), GIANT SNOWFLAKE, SUMMER SNOWFLAKE. Bulbous perennial;
leaves broadly linear, to 10 cm long and 5–20 mm wide, surrounded at base by tubular sheaths;
scapes 20–40(–80) cm tall; umbel with 2–10 nodding flowers, subtended by a membranous
bract 3–5 cm long; pedicels 1–4(–7) cm long; perianth campanulate, without elongate perianth
tube; corona absent; perianth segments free nearly to base, all about equal, white with green
tips, 1.5–3 cm long; anthers opening by longitudinal slits; seeds 5–7 mm long, black. Cultivated
                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1205




Hymenocallis caroliniana [CO1]                       Hymenocallis liriosme [HEA]




            Hypoxis hirsuta [BB2]           Ipheion uniflorum [CHT]                Leucojum aestivum [LAM]




                    Lycoris radiata [SIN]               Muscari neglectum [BB2]
1206 LILIACEAE/LYCORIS

and escapes; Dallas Co. Mar. Native of Europe. Two other similar European species are cultivated
and persist in nc TX: I

Galanthus nivalis L., (genus: Greek: gala, milk, and anthos, flower; sp.: of snow), SNOWDROP, has
the inner tepals much shorter than outer, only the inner green-tipped, and anthers opening at
tip. I

Leucojum vernum L., (spring), SPRING SNOWFLAKE, has flowers solitary. I

                                           LYCORIS
AA genus of 11 species native from China and Japan to Burma; cultivated as ornamentals; pre-
viously placed in the Amaryllidaceae.  The bulbs of Lycoris species are poisonous due to the
presence of the alkaloid, lycorine (Lampe & McCann 1985). (Named after Lycoris, a beautiful
Roman actress and mistress of Marc Antony)
REFERENCE: Ping-Sheng et al. 1994.

Lycoris radiata (L’Hér.) Herb., (with rays), SPIDER-LILY, RED SPIDER-LILY. Bulbous perennial; leaves
to ca. 8 mm wide, glaucous, not appearing with the flowers; inflorescence a few-flowered umbel
at end of a solid scape; flowers bright red, lacking fragrance; perianth ca. 4 cm long, the lobes
reflexed with wavy margins; stamens much-exserted, 2 times as long as perianth; ovary infe-
rior; fruit a few-seeded capsule. Cultivated and long persists or possibly escapes; roadside ditch
in Grayson Co. (G. Diggs, pers. obs.). Fall. Native of China and Japan. Poisonous (Lampe &
McCann 1985).  I

                              MUSCARI GRAPE-HYACINTH
AA genus of 30 species ranging from Europe and the Mediterranean to w Asia; some contain
alkaloids including colchicine; a number are cultivated as ornamentals and the flowers of some
are used in scent making. Muscari is sometimes segregated with similar genera (e.g., Camassia,
Hyacinthus, Ornithogalum) into the Hyacinthaceae (Dahlgren et al. 1985). (Named in reference
to the musky flower odor of some species)

Muscari neglectum Guss. ex Ten., (overlooked), STARCH GRAPE-HYACINTH. Low-growing bulbous
perennial; leaves basal, several or many, dark green, about 3–4 mm wide, arched or loosely
coiled and spreading, longer than flowering stem; inflorescences scapose, racemose, to ca. 20
cm tall; perianth urceolate, dark blue with whitish teeth (rarely all white), about 3 mm broad,
3.5–6 mm long, with musky odor; pedicels 2–4 mm long; fruit a capsule. Cultivated widely, es-
caping and naturalizing, yards, fields, and roadsides; Bosque, Dallas, Grayson, McLennan, and
Rockwall cos., also Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); nc, c and e TX. Mar–early Apr. Native of
the Mediterranean region. [M. racemosus (L.) Lam. & DC.] I

                                          NARCISSUS
Bulbous, glabrous, scapose perennials with linear, flat or terete leaves exserted from closed tu-
bular sheaths; inflorescence terminal, subtended by a membranous sheathing bract splitting
along 1 side; flowers sweet-scented; perianth united into a tube, with perianth parts spreading
to reflexed from the base of the central tubular or cup-shaped crown (= corona), yellow or
white; stamens included or barely exserted from the tube; fruit a many-seeded capsule.
AA genus of 27 species; a number of species (and their hybrids) of this Old World (European
and Mediterranean) genus are cultivated for their early spring flowers; previously placed in the
Amaryllidaceae. Several of the most frequently cultivated species and their hybrids, that long
persist around old homesites or escape, are treated here.  The bulbs have been known to
                                                                                      NARCISSUS/LILIACEAE 1207

cause poisoning in humans and also in livestock when used as emergency food; even small
amounts cause vomiting; bulbs and leaves can cause dermatitis in susceptible individuals; tox-
ins include alkaloids (e.g., narcissine, lycorine) and a glycoside; raphides (= bundles of micro-
scopic, needle-like calcium oxalate crystals) are also present in the bulbs and can cause me-
chanical injury to the mouth, throat, or hands by puncturing cell membranes (Kingsbury 1964;
Schmutz & Hamilton 1979; Spoerke & Smolinske 1990; Turner & Szczawinski 1991). (Greek
plant name derived from narke, numbness or torpor, from its narcotic properties; in Greek my-
thology the youth Narcissus fell in love with his own reflection in a pool and was turned into
this plant by the gods.)

1. Crown nearly as long as or slightly longer than lobes of perianth; perianth tube (below attach-
   ment of perianth lobes) broadly conical, about as long as lobes ____________________ N. pseudonarcissus
1. Crown ca. 2/3 as long as lobes of perianth or less (often much less); perianth tube nearly cylindri-
   cal, slightly to much shorter than lobes.
   2. Crown ca. 1/2–2/3 as long as perianth lobes; perianth usually yellow; flower 1 per flowering
      stalk __________________________________________________________________ N. ⫻incomparabilis
   2. Crown 1/3 as long as perianth lobes or less; perianth yellow or white (but crown can be col-
      ored); flowers usually 2–10(–15) per flowering stalk or if 1, then perianth white.
      3. Leaves thick, terete (= cylindrical) or nearly so (and grooved on upper surface), green ______ N. jonquilla
      3. Leaves flat or nearly so, mostly ± glaucous.
          4. Perianth white; crown red-rimmed; flowers usually 1 per flowering stalk _______________ N. poeticus
          4. Perianth yellow or white; crown yellow or orange; flowers 2–8(–15) per flowering stalk
              __________________________________________________________________________ N. tazetta

Narcissus ⫻incomparabilis Mill. [N. poeticus ⫻ N. pseudonarcissus], (incomparable). Hybrid simi-
lar to N. pseudonarcissus; leaves 8–12 mm wide; perianth lobes 25–35 mm long; perianth tube
20–25 mm long; corona 13–22 mm long; there are numerous forms including many of the mod-
ern “fancy” types (Shinners 1958a). Cultivated; no escaped specimens from nc TX seen; included
because it is expected to be found persisting. Mar. I

Narcissus jonquilla L., (from Spanish: junquillo, rush, for the slender leaves), JONQUIL. Leaves 2–4
mm wide; inflorescences 2–5-flowered; pedicels unequal; flowers fragrant; perianth yellow
with deeper yellow crown; perianth lobes 10–15 mm long; perianth tube slender, (17–)20–30
mm long; crown 3–5 mm long. Cultivated and long persists; Grayson and Hunt cos. Feb–Mar.
Native of s Spain and Algeria. I

Narcissus poeticus L., (pertaining to the poets), PHEASANT’S-EYE, POET’S NARCISSUS. Leaves 5–13
mm wide; flowers very fragrant; perianth lobes 15–30 mm long; perianth tube 20–30 mm long,
slender, ± equal in diam. to apex; corona 1–2.5 mm long. Cultivated; no escaped specimens from
nc TX seen; included because it is expected to be found persisting. Mar–May. Native from
France to Greece. Flowers used in making perfume. I

Narcissus pseudonarcissus L., (false Narcissus), DAFFODIL, TRUMPET NARCISSUS. Leaves 5–15 mm wide;
perianth yellow (rarely white) with crown usually deeper yellow (rarely white); perianth lobes
18–40(–55) mm long; perianth tube broad, gradually flared, about 12–18 mm long; crown 15–50
mm long. Cultivated and long persists; Grayson and Hunt cos. Feb–Mar. Native of Europe. I

Narcissus tazetta L., (small cup, from Italian word), POLYANTHUS NARCISSUS. Leaves 5–25 mm
wide; flowers fragrant, perianth lobes 8–22 mm long; perianth tube slender, 12–18 mm long
tube; crown 3–6 mm long. Cultivated and long persists; according to Shinners (1958a), this spe-
cies and its hybrids are the most frequent escapes from cultivation in nc TX; included on that
basis. Late Feb–Mar. Native of Mediterranean area. PAPER-WHITE NARCISSUS is a large-flowered,
all white form of N. tazetta. I
1208 LILIACEAE/NOTHOSCORDUM

Narcissus ⫻odorus L. [N. jonquilla ⫻ N. pseudonarcissus], CAMPERNELLE JONQUIL, is occasionally
cultivated; this hybrid, with usually 2–4 yellow flowers per flowering stalk, resembles N.
jonquilla in having thick, grooved leaves, but has slightly larger flowers and the crown ca. 1/2
as long as the perianth lobes. I

                           NOTHOSCORDUM FALSE GARLIC
AAn American genus of 20 species similar to Allium but odorless; previously considered by
some authorities to be in the Alliaceae (e.g., Dahlgren et al. 1985) or the Amaryllidaceae. (Greek:
nothos, false, and scordon, garlic)

Nothoscordum bivalve (L.) Britton, (two-valved), CROW-POISON, YELLOW FALSE GARLIC. Bulbous
glabrous perennial, 7–40 cm tall; leaves basal, with closed, tubular, basal sheath and slender
blade; inflorescences scapose, umbellate, of (3–)6–12 flowers, subtended by 2 scarious bracts;
flowers scentless; perianth funnelform, 8–10 mm long, whitish with yellowish base inside and
lavender to purple-red midribs on backs of perianth segments. Open woods, prairies, disturbed
sites; throughout most of TX; one of our most abundant and widespread native plants. Mostly
Mar–early May and late Sep–Oct. Resembling an Allium and placed by some in that genus [as A.
bivalve (L.) Kuntze]; easily distinguished by its longer anthers (2 mm long) and lack of odor.

                                     ORNITHOGALUM
AAn Eurasian and African genus of ca. 200 species; sometimes segregated with similar genera
(e.g., Camassia, Muscari, Ornithogalum) into the Hyacinthaceae (Dahlgren et al. 1985). Some
species have alkaloids including colchicine; a number are cultivated as ornamentals; some have
edible bulbs;  others are toxic. (Greek: ornis, a bird, and gala, milk; this was an expression
used by the ancient Greeks to describe something amazing—Love 1994).
Ornithogalum umbellatum L., (with umbels), STAR-OF-BETHLEHEM. Bulbous perennial 10–35 cm
tall; leaves basal, longer than flowering stem; inflorescence a simple corymb; flowers subtended
by conspicuous, clasping, papery, acuminate bracts; perianth broadly funnelform or nearly ro-
tate; perianth segments white inside, green with white margins outside; fruit a capsule. Low of-
ten shady ground, cultivated, escaped, and naturalized; Dallas and Grayson cos., also Collin Co.
(R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); Blackland Prairie and Edwards Plateau. Apr. Native of Europe. All
parts of the plant, particularly the bulbs, are considered poisonous to humans and animals due
to the presence of a digitalis-like alkaloid or cardiac glycosides; death in livestock has been re-
ported (Muenscher 1951; Kingsbury 1964; Fuller & McClintock 1986; Blackwell 1990; Spoerke &
Smolinske 1990).  I

                           POLYGONATUM SOLOMON’S-SEAL
AA n temperate (especially sw China) genus of 55 species of herbs with robust horizontal rhi-
zomes; species variously used as ornamentals, for food, or medicinally. Polygonatum is some-
times segregated with similar genera into the Convallariaceae (Dahlgren et al. 1985). The com-
mon name refers to the scar formed on the rhizome when the stem breaks off at the end of the
growing season; it supposedly resembles the official seal of King Solomon (Ajilvsgi 1984).
(Greek, polys, many, and gonu, knee, in reference to the many joints of the rhizome)
REFERENCES: Gates 1917; Ownbey 1944.

Polygonatum biflorum (Walter) Elliott, (two-flowered), GREAT SOLOMON’S-SEAL. Glabrous peren-
nial from knotty rhizomes; stem erect-arching, to ca. 1 m tall; leaves borne along the stem, ellip-
tic-lanceolate to broadly elliptic, to ca. 15 cm long and 7 cm wide; inflorescences axillary, 1–9-
flowered; peduncles to ca. 5 cm long; pedicels 0–2 cm long; flowers perfect, pendulous; perianth
13–20 mm long, greenish white; fruit a blue-black berry. Rich, moist, wooded slopes; Dallas
                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1209




Narcissus ⫻incomparabilis [G&F]                      Narcissus jonquilla [NIC]                  Narcissus poeticus [NIC]




                   Narcissus pseudonarcissus [LAM]                                           Narcissus tazetta [LAM]




Nothoscordum bivalve [BB2]                 Ornithogalum umbellatum [NIC]                  Polygonatum biflorum [BAI]
1210 MARANTACEAE

(Spring Creek Preserve in Garland) and Grayson cos., also Lamar Co. (TOES 1993); mainly e TX.
Mar–May. (TOES 1993: V) 

                             SCHOENOCAULON SABADILLA
AA genus of 10 species native from the s U.S. to Peru;  some have alkaloids including
veratrin; S. officinale A.Gray (SABADILLA, CEVADILLA) has seeds that are insecticidal and used in
veterinary medicine. (Greek: schoeno, reed or rush-like, and caulos, a stalk)
Schoenocaulon texanum Scheele, (of Texas), TEXAS SABADILLA. Herbaceous perennials from
bulbs; scapes naked, to 55 cm tall; leaves all basal, grass-like, to 60 cm long, mostly 4 mm or less
wide; spikes 10–15 mm in diam.; flowers sessile or nearly so, each subtended by a small bract;
perianth segments 6, essentially separate, fleshy-thickened or leathery, linear-oblong, with
thickish entire margins, 3–4 mm long, ca. 1 mm or less wide, greenish white; stamens 6; fila-
ments 3.5–5 mm long; capsules 10–15 mm long. Limestone soils, rocky grasslands and openings
in juniper-oak woodlands; Bell Co., also Burnet and Williamson cos. (Balcones Canyonlands
Nat. Wildlife Refuge, C. Sexton, pers. comm.); s margin of nc TX s through Edwards Plateau to
Trans-Pecos. Mar–Jul.

Schoenocaulon drummondii A. Gray, (for Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish botanist
and collector in North America), DRUMMOND’S SABADILLA, GREEN-LILY, the only other member of
the genus occuring in TX, is known mainly from the s 1/2 of the state. It can be distinguished
by its submembranous, elliptic to ovate-elliptic perianth segments with thin erose margins, a
larger spike (15–20 mm in diam.), and its phenology (usually flowering in autumn).

                     ZIGADENUS DEATH-CAMASS, POISON-SEGO
AA genus of 18 species native to North America, the Urals, and e Asia;  many are poisonous
due to the presence of alkaloids; a few are cultivated as ornamentals. Previously sometimes
spelled Zygadenus. (Greek: zygos, a yoke, and aden, a gland, referring to the glands sometimes
being in pairs)
Zigadenus nuttallii (A. Gray) S. Watson, (for Sir Thomas Nuttall, 1786–1859, English-American
botanist), NUTTALL’S DEATH-CAMASS, POISON-CAMASS, DEATH-CAMASS. Perennial from bulb, 30–
100 cm tall; leaves crowded near base with short, tubular basal sheath (closed but very thin
down side opposite blade, easily splitting); inflorescence a raceme or a panicle with a few short
branches near base, these flower-bearing nearly to base; pedicels becoming 10–25 mm long; pe-
rianth segments 6–9 mm long, white, ovate, abruptly narrow and claw-like at base; fruit a 3-
lobed capsule ca. 8–12 mm long. Prairies, open woods; e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. Late Mar–early May. All parts of the plant may be fatally poisonous to cattle,
sheep, and horses due to complex steroidal alkaloids (Sperry et al. 1955; Ajilvsgi 1984; Blackwell
1990); Zigadenus species have caused poisoning in children from eating the bulbs or chewing
the flowers and deaths have been reported from eating the bulbs; toxins present include
zygadenine, zygacine, and related alkaloids (Marsh et al. 1915; Schmutz & Hamilton 1979;
Stephens 1980; Ajilvsgi 1984; Fuller & McClintock 1986). 


                 MARANTACEAE ARROWROOT FAMILY
AA medium-sized (535 species in 29 genera) primarily tropical family of rhizomatous peren-
nial herbs. The stamens are distinctive; all are sterile and modified into staminodes with the
exception of one petal-like functional stamen. There are a number of ornamentals including
Calathea and Maranta. Family name from Maranta, ARROWROOT or PRAYER-PLANT, a tropical
American genus of ca. 20 species. Maranta arundinacea L., WEST INDIAN ARROWROOT, has a
                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1211




                                                            Zigadenus nuttallii [BB2]


Schoenocaulon texanum [HEA]




                              Thalia dealbata [CO1, NIC]
1212 ORCHIDACEAE

starchy edible rhizome, the starch being easily digested and used for infants and invalids.
(Named for Bartolommeo Maranti, 16th century Venetian botanist) (subclass Zingiberidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the only nc TX species is a large rhizomatous herb with
broad, banana-like leaves with a joint where the long petiole and blade join; inflorescences usu-
ally white-powdery; flowers purple; androecium of a single fertile stamen and often
staminoidea.
REFERENCES: Rogers 1984; Dahlgren et al. 1985.

                                            THALIA
AA mostly tropical American (1 in Africa) genus of 7 species. (Named for Johann Thal, a Ger-
man physician and naturalist who died in 1583)

Thalia dealbata Fraser ex Roscoe, (white-washed), POWDERY THALIA, POWDERED THALIA. Peren-
nial herb 1–2 m tall from strong rhizomes, glabrous and with whitened surfaces; leaves alter-
nate, long-petioled, mostly in basal half of plant, large, banana-like; leaf blades 30–50 cm long,
to 20 cm wide, ovate-lanceolate, with prominent midrib and numerous side veins parallel or
concentric with each other; petioles to 80 cm long, the base winged and clasping; inflorescence
with whitish appearance, the axes zigzag in appearance, a rather small, loose panicle with a
prominent basal bract paired with a small one, the bracts typically with conspicuously whit-
ened surfaces; flowers small, usually paired and enclosed by two bracts, sessile; sepals 3, short;
petals 3, unequal, purple, 5–10 mm long; staminodes present, petal-like, purple, united, one with
cupped, projecting apex exceeding the petals; pistil 1; ovary inferior; fruit a bluish purple,
subglobose urticle 10–15 mm in diam. Shallow water, ditches, pond margins, or other wet areas;
Dallas Co., also escaping cultivation in Tarrant Co. (Fort Worth Botanic Garden); mainly se and
e TX. May.


                      ORCHIDACEAE ORCHID FAMILY
Ours perennial terrestrial herbs with fleshy-fibrous roots, some species rhizomatous or with
swollen, bulbous base, autotrophic and with green leaves or saprophytic and lacking chloro-
phyll; leaves when present basal or alternate, with sheath or clasping petiolar base; leaf blades
with parallel or parallel convergent veins, or ribbed and net-veined, or rather fleshy and not
evidently veined; flowers solitary or in spikes or racemes, bilaterally symmetrical; sepals 3,
green or colored and petal-like; petals 3, one (the lip or labellum, normally the lowest due to
twisting of the flower) slightly or very different from the others in shape or size and often
elaborated into lobes, spurs, sacs, fringes, or grooves; nectaries usually present; stamens and pis-
til united into a central knob-like or column-like structure (the column) with 1 (or 2 in some
species in other regions) inconspicuous sessile anther; pollen usually in waxy masses (= pol-
linia); ovary inferior, in most species twisted and the flower thus resupinate (= inverted 180°,
making the lip the lowermost of the petals); placentation parietal; fruit (in ours) a dry dehiscent
capsule; seeds very numerous, minute, without endosperm.
AThis is a huge cosmopolitan group with more species than any other monocot family; esti-
mates range from ca. 17,500–30,000 species (Luer 1975) or even more in 796 genera; Dressler
(1981) estimated 19,192 species and Atwood (1986), in an analysis of the size of the family, deter-
mined there were 19,128 species and suggested that eventually the total may reach 20,000-
23,000 or even an improbable maximum of 25,000. The Orchidaceae is possibly larger even
than the Asteraceae and thus possibly the largest family of flowering plants. Orchids are par-
ticularly abundant in the tropics where many species are epiphytic; Atwood (1986) indicated
epiphytes account for 73% of the family; many have special swollen water and nutrient storage
structures called pseudobulbs—a particularly important adaptation for the epiphytic habit.
                                                                                          ORCHIDACEAE 1213

The family is extremely important horticulturally for its beautiful and intricate flowers; orchid
cultivation is very old, dating back nearly 1,000 years in China; well known cultivated genera
include Cattleya (CORSAGE ORCHID), Dendrobium, and Epidendrum. In addition to hybridiza-
tion, tissue culture and other sophisticated techniques are now used in orchid propagation and
cultivation. Pollination mechanisms are often incredibly specialized (e.g., pseudocopulation in
which the flower mimics a female insect and thus attracts males who carry out pollination);
some species even imprison and intoxicate their pollinators. Special relationships with mycor-
rhizal fungi are often necessary for seed germination. The fruit of Vanilla planifolia Jackson, a
tropical American spice used by the Aztecs, is the source of the flavoring vanilla. Many orchids
have a low tolerance for environmental disturbance and many species are now greatly reduced
in number or extinct due to habitat destruction and modification. Family name from Orchis, a
genus of 33 species native from the n temperate zone to sw China and India. (Greek: orchis, tes-
ticle, in reference to the shape of the tuberous roots of some species) (subclass Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: perennial herbs with alternate or basal leaves; reproductive
parts united into a central column; flowers bilaterally symmetrical, with 3 sepals and 3 petals, 1
of the petals (the lip) usually being different from the other 2; fruit a capsule with very numer-
ous nearly microscopic seeds.
REFERENCES: Correll 1937, 1947, 1950, 1961a; Schultes & Pease 1963; Magrath 1973; Luer 1975;
Dressler 1981; Rasmussen 1985; Atwood 1986; Burns-Balogh & Funk 1986.

1. Stems with 1 or more leaf blades; plants green and photosynthetic.
   2. Flowers greenish or uniformly orange, neither white nor with any pinkish, reddish, or purplish
      pigmentation, with a slender spur ca. as long as or longer than the ovary (spur 9–33 mm long).
      3. Flowers greenish; spur 9–14 mm long; lip divided into 3 linear divisions, not fringed ________ Habenaria
      3. Flowers orange; spur 20–33 mm long; lip conspicuously fringed _______________________ Platanthera
   2. Flowers either white to white with green or yellow markings OR if not white then variously
      colored with at least some pinkish to reddish or purplish pigmentation (not orange), without
      a spur.
      4. Stems with 6–12 leaves below inflorescence, the leaves passing into leafy bracts under the
         flowers; leaves large, 6–20 cm long, 2–7 cm wide, not at all grass-like; flowers greenish to
         brownish, yellowish, or pinkish, with purplish or reddish markings ________________________ Epipactis
      4. Stems with 1–6 leaves below inflorescence, the floral bracts if present abruptly differenti-
         ated; leaves large OR small and often grass-like; flowers white to white with green or yellow
         markings OR pink to rose-purple.
         5. Stems with a single leaf inserted ca. halfway up the stem (floral bract also present); lip
            heavily bearded; flowers 1(–2), not in a conspicuous spiral; lip the lowermost of the petals
            ____________________________________________________________________________ Pogonia
         5. Stems with 1–6 leaves, if 1 then the leaf ± basal; lip bearded or glabrous; flowers 2–nu-
            merous; lip either the uppermost of the petals and the flowers not in a conspicuous
            spiral OR lip the lowermost of the petals and flowers usually in a conspicuous spiral.
            6. Flowers not in a conspicuous easily visible spiral; perianth 7–40 mm broad, pink to
               rose-pink or rose-purple or rarely white; lip bearded, representing the uppermost of
               the petals _______________________________________________________________ Calopogon
            6. Flowers usually arranged in a conspicuous easily visible spiral; perianth 1.5–4 mm broad,
               white or white with green or yellow markings; lip not bearded, representing the lower
               most of the petals _________________________________________________________ Spiranthes
1. Stems without leaf blades, with sheaths or clasping bracts only; plants green and photosyn-
   thetic OR not green (yellowish to reddish, brownish, or purplish) and saprophytic.
   7. Plants green, photosynthetic; flowers sessile; perianth white or white with green or yellow
      marking; floral bracts slightly longer than the ovary ____________________________________ Spiranthes
1214 ORCHIDACEAE/CALOPOGON

  7. Plants not green, saprophytic, the stems usually yellowish to reddish, brownish, or purplish;
     flowers short-pedicelled; perianth mottled purple, brown, yellow, and white; floral bracts not
     longer than the ovary.
     8. Stem bracts elliptic-ovate, shorter to slightly longer than broad; floral bracts easily observed,
        ± conspicuous; perianth either < 10 mm long OR much longer (15–20 mm long); lip with 5–
        7 longitudinal ridges or crests; rhizomes with annular markings, not coral-like ____________ Hexalectris
     8. Stem with long, tubular sheaths much longer than broad; floral bracts minute, inconspicu-
        ous; perianth < 10 mm long; lip without ridges or crests; rhizomes coral-like, lacking annular
        markings __________________________________________________________________ Corallorrhiza


                                    CALOPOGON GRASS-PINK
Erect, scapose herbs from corms; leaf 1 (rarely more), grass-like, sheathing the stem near base;
racemes with 2–20 flowers; flower buds waxy; flowers showy, pink to rose-pink or rose-purple,
rarely white, not resupinate (the lip therefore the uppermost of the petals); lip bearded with
numerous clavellate hairs; pollinia 4; capsules erect.
AA North American genus of 5 species (1 described in 1995); sometimes cultivated as orna-
mentals. (Greek: calos, beautiful, and pogon, beard, from the colorful tuft of bristles on the lip
which is characteristic of the genus)
REFERENCES: Magrath 1989; Goldman 1995.

1. Corm forked; leaf nearly as long as or longer than inflorescence; buds grooved longitudinally;
   flowers fragrant _____________________________________________________________ C. oklahomensis
1. Corm spherical, not forked; leaf usually shorter than inflorescence; buds usually smooth; flowers
   not fragrant.
   2. Flowers usually more than 8 (varying from 4–20), opening in slow succession up the raceme,
      the blooming period extending over a prolonged period; leaf usually > 5 mm wide (varying
      from 4–37 mm); column usually 10–20 mm long ____________________________________ C. tuberosus
   2. Flowers usually 2–5, all opening nearly simultaneously; leaf usually ca. 2 mm wide (varying
      from 1–4 mm); column 7–8 mm long ______________________________________________ C. barbatus

Calopogon barbatus (Walter) Ames, (barbed), BEARDED GRASS-PINK. Plant 15–30(–45) cm tall;
leaf 5–18 cm long; pedicels 6–10 mm long; flowers very closely spaced; lateral sepals grooved
longitudinally, recurved; sepals and petals 12–17 mm long; lip 10–13 mm long, 7–10 mm wide;
disk of lip pink, the same color as most of flower; stigma flat against column surface. Bogs,
marshes, other wet areas; Henderson Co. (Correll & Johnston 1970) near e margin of nc TX;
mainly e TX. Apr–May. Goldman (1995) indicated that such TX specimens previously identi-
fied as C. barbatus are actually small individuals of C. oklahomensis; it is therefore probable that
C. barbatus is not a component of the nc TX flora or even the TX flora.

Calopogon oklahomensis D.H. Goldman, (of Oklahoma). Plant to 35 cm tall; leaf to 35 cm long,
5–15 mm wide; flowers 2–7(–11), opening in rapid succession, with citronella odor; lateral sepals
grooved longitudinally, recurved; petals 11–20 mm long; lip 9–15 mm long; disk of lip pinkish, the
same color as most of flower, with a basal area of yellow hairs above which is an area of pinkish
hairs; stigma flat against column surface. Mesic to damp, acidic, sandy or loamy soils in oak
woods, savannas, or bog margins; Lamar Co. (Goldman 1995—specimen at TEX); mainly e TX;
one of the most recently described species in nc TX (Goldman 1995). Mar–May. (TOES 1993: IV) 

Calopogon tuberosus (L.) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (tuberous), GRASS-PINK. Plant 20–80(–135)
cm tall; leaf to 50+ cm long, 5–50 mm wide; lateral sepals smooth, straight; sepals and petals 12–
27 mm long; lip 10–20 mm long, 5.5–13 mm wide; disk of lip white with basal area of white to
yellow hairs above which is a region of white, yellow, or orange hairs; stigma usually perpen-
                                                               CORALLORRHIZA/ORCHIDACEAE 1215

dicular to column surface. Bogs, marshes, other wet areas; Lamar Co. (Correll 1961a) in Red
River drainage; mainly se and e TX. May–Jun. [C. pulchellus R. Br. ex W.T. Aiton]

                            CORALLORRHIZA CORALROOT
AA n temperate genus of 15 species of saprophytes lacking chlorophyll; some are cultivated as
ornamentals. (Greek: corallion, coral, and rhiza, root, referring to the coral-like rhizome)
REFERENCES: Engel 1997; Freudenstein 1997.

Corallorrhiza wisteriana Conrad, (for its discoverer, Charles Jones Wister, 1782–1865), SPRING
CORALROOT, WISTER’S CORALROOT. Plant 10–40 cm tall, from irregular rhizomes; stems yellow-
ish to reddish brown or purple, not bulbous-based; flowers in a small, spike-like raceme; peri-
anth brownish, greenish yellow, or reddish brown with purple dots; lip white with purple to
pink markings, 5–6 mm long, with notched apex and entire or denticulate margin; pollinia 4. In
leaf mold on limestone hills or on sandy soils; Dallas and Grayson (Hagerman Nat. Wildlife
Refuge) cos., also Coryell (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997) and Fannin (Freudenstein 1997) cos.;
mainly se and e TX; also Edwards Plateau. Apr.

Corallorrhiza odontorhiza (Willd.) Nutt., (tooth-rooted), AUTUMN CORALROOT, LATE
CORALROOT, has been collected in n Red River Co. (Magrath 12302, OCLA) just to the e of nc TX;
it differs in having the stems bulbous-based, the lip only 4 mm long with rounded apex and
eroded margin, and flowering in the fall.

                                EPIPACTIS HELLEBORINE
AA genus of 22 species ranging from the n temperate zone to the tropics. (Greek: epipactis, an
ancient name applied by Theophrastus, ca. 350 B.C., to a plant used to curdle milk, possibly
hellebore—Luer 1975)

Epipactis gigantea Douglas ex Hook., (gigantic), GIANT HELLEBORINE, STREAM-ORCHIS, STREAM
EPIPACTIS, CHATTERBOX. Plant 20–80 cm tall, rhizomatous; leaves clasping stem, broadly elliptic
to linear-lanceolate, 6–22 cm long, 2–7 cm wide; inflorescences 2–8-flowered, prominently
bracteate; flowers greenish to brownish, yellowish, or pinkish, with purplish or reddish mark-
ings; sepals 15–25 mm long; capsules pendent, 2–2.5 cm long. Stream banks in woods; Dallas
and Wise cos. (Correll 1961a); also Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Jun.

                             HABENARIA FINGER ORCHID
AA pantropical and subtropical genus of ca. 600 species depending on circumscription; a
number of segregates are sometimes split out (e.g., many species previously placed in
Habenaria are now treated in Platanthera). (Latin: habena, reins, thong, or strap, in allusion to
the shape of the long, strap-like divisions of the lip of some species)
REFERENCE: Ames 1910.

Habenaria repens Nutt., (creeping), WATER SPIDER ORCHID, CREEPING ORCHID, NUTTALL’S
HABENARIA. Plant glabrous, 10–90 cm tall; stems leafy; leaves 3-ribbed, 5–24 cm long, 3.5–20
mm wide; racemes usually densely many-flowered; flowers greenish, small; sepals 3–7 mm
long; lip divided into three narrow parts to near lobes, the middle lobe 4–7 mm long, linear, not
fringed, the spur 9–14 mm long. Pond margins, ditches, other wet areas, often in water; Milam
Co. (Correll 1961a) near extreme e margin of nc TX; Hatch et al. (1990) also cited vegetational
area 4 (Fig. 2); mainly se and e TX. May–Nov.

                        HEXALECTRIS CRESTED-CORALROOT
Plants saprophytic, leafless; rhizomes irregular; stems reddish or purplish; flowers in a spike-
1216 ORCHIDACEAE/HEXALECTRIS

like raceme; corolla lip with 5–7 longitudinal crests down the middle of the disc; pollinia 8.
AA genus of 7 species of the s U.S. and Mexico.The plants live in symbiosis with a mycorrhizal
fungus (Luer 1975). Luer (1975) has excellent color photographs of all three nc TX species.
(Greek: hex, six, and alectryon, cock, referring to the 5–7 crests resembling a cock’s comb on the lip)
REFERENCES: Luer 1975; Catling & Engel 1993; Engel 1997.

1. Lip with 5–7 longitudinal, purple, non-wavy crests, shallowly 3-lobed, the fissures < 2 mm deep;
   petals (non-lip) either 11 mm or less long OR larger and yellowish or purplish brown, with brown
   or purple veins; racemes with up to 25 flowers.
   2. Sepals, petals, and lip 12–20 mm long; petals (non-lip) yellowish or purplish brown, with brown
      or purple veins; middle lobe of lip usually yellow to white with purple striations ______________ H. spicata
   2. Sepals, petals, and lip 11 mm or less long; petals (non-lip) pinkish brown; middle lobe
      of lip bright purple ________________________________________________________________ H. nitida
1. Lip with 5 conspicuous, longitudinal, yellow, wavy crests, deeply 3-lobed, the fissures > 3 mm
   deep; petals (non-lip) 15–20 mm long, maroon or deep purple; racemes with 10 flowers or less
    _____________________________________________________________________________ H. warnockii

Hexalectris nitida L.O. Williams, (shining), SHINING HEXALECTRIS. Plant 15–30 cm tall; racemes
with up to 20 flowers; flower parts with shiny or polished appearance; middle lobe of lip bright
purple, the lateral lobes white. Under juniper trees; Dallas Co.; also known s and w of nc TX
from Brewster, Bandera, Kendall, and Taylor cos. (Mahler 1988). Jul. m/92

Hexalectris spicata (Walter) Barnhart, (with spikes), CRESTED-CORALROOT, BRUNETTA, BUFF-
CREST, COCK’S-COMB, LEAFLESS ORCHID. Plant 15–80 cm tall; racemes with 5–25 flowers; middle
lobe of lip usually yellow to white with purple striations; occasionally plants lack purple pig-
ment—the sepals and petals (non-lip) are then mahogany brown with darker brown striations,
and the lip is all white except for faint yellowish markings (Luer 1975). While we are following
Catling and Engel (1993) in recognizing two varieties, these taxa might better be recognized as
forms. The key to varieties is modified from Catling and Engel (1993).

1. Flowers usually not opening (typically auto-pollinating, but sometimes opening); the 5 central
   veins of the lip with their highest keels raised 0.4–0.7 mm above the lip surface; column without
   a rostellar flap separating the pollen masses from the stigmatic surface; flowering in nc TX in
   Jun–Jul _______________________________________________________________________ var. arizonica
1. Flowers opening, the sepals and petals often with recurving tips; the 5 central veins of the lip
   with their highest keels raised (0.4–)0.7–1 mm above the lip surface; column with a rostellar flap
   separating the pollen masses from the stigmatic surface; flowering in TX in May–early Jun _______ var. spicata

var. arizonica (S. Watson) Catling & V.S. Engel, (of Arizona). In rotting wood or leaf litter in oak,
pine, or juniper woods over limestone; Palo Pinto Co., also Dallas and Tarrant cos. (Engel 1997);
in TX also known from Anderson Co. in e TX, Travis Co. just s of nc TX, and Brewster and
Culberson cos. in far w TX. Jun–Jul. Catling and Engel (1993) indicated that most plants seen in
the Dallas area and all in Travis Co. have closed flowers that do not open and are apparently
auto-pollinating; they suggested this taxon is an auto-pollinating race derived from var. spicata;
alternatively, they suggested that var. arizonica might have a hybrid origin, possibly resulting
from a cross between H. nitida and H. spicata var. spicata. [Corallorhiza arizonica S. Watson]

var. spicata. Oak, hickory, or conifer woods, calcareous sandy or organic soils; Dallas Co., also
Bell, Brown, and Coryell cos. (HPC); according to Catling and Engel (1993), this species occurs at
the same site (Dallas Nature Center) as H. spicata var. arizonica and H. nitida; TX distribution
unclear. May–early Jun. According to J. Stanford (pers. comm.), these delicate-appearing plants
have massive underground rhizomes (ca. 10 cm in diam.).
                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1217




Calopogon barbatus [GWO]            Calopogon oklahomensis [LIN]                       Calapogon tuberosus [LUN]




Corallorrhiza wisteriana [LUN]        Epipactis gigantea [LUN]                          Habenaria repens [LUN]




Hexalectris nitida [CO2]         Hexalectris spicata var. arizonica [LIN]         Hexalectris spicata var. spicata [LUN]
1218 ORCHIDACEAE/PLATANTHERA

Hexalectris warnockii Ames & Correll, (for Barton Holland Warnock, 1911–1998, Trans-Pecos
Texas botanist), TEXAS PURPLE-SPIKE. Plant to ca. 30 cm tall; inflorescences with up to 10 flowers;
sepals, petals, and lip ca. 15–20 mm long; middle lobe of lip edged in purple or white, with 5
conspicuous yellow crests, 3 of which reach the apex; lateral lobes of lip pale pink with purple
veins. Under juniper trees; Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988; Engel 1997); also Edwards Plateau and
Trans-Pecos. Jul. m/92

                                           PLATANTHERA
              FINGER ORCHID, BUTTERFLY ORCHID, FRINGED ORCHID
AA northern hemisphere genus of 40 species. In the past this genus has often been lumped
with Habenaria. Many other Platanthera species occur in e TX. (Greek: platys, broad or wide,
and anthera, anther, in reference to the unusually wide anther)
REFERENCE: Ames 1910.

Platanthera ciliaris (L.) Lindl., (ciliate, fringed), YELLOW FRINGED ORCHID, YELLOW FINGER OR-
CHID. Plant 24–100 cm tall; leaves oblong lanceolate to lanceolate, 7–30 cm long, 0.6–6 cm wide;
racemes densely or laxly flowered; flowers very showy, bright to deep orange; spur slender,
longer than the ovary; lip 8–12 mm long, 2–3 mm wide, ciliate-fringed, the fringes usually 10
mm or more long. Low woods, near edge of water, moist areas; Henderson and Milam cos.
(Correll 1961a) near extreme e margin of nc TX; mainly e TX. Jun–Oct. [Habenaria ciliaris (L.)
R. Br. ex W.T. Aiton] m/103

                                   POGONIA SNAKE-MOUTH
AA genus of 2 species of North America and temperate Asia. (Greek: pogonias, bearded, refer-
ring to the bearded lip)
REFERENCE: Teuscher 1978

Pogonia ophioglossoides (L.) Ker Gawl., (resembling Ophioglossum–adder’s-tongue fern, in refer-
ence to the single leaf), ROSE POGONIA. Plant 20–40 cm tall, from fibrous roots; stems rigidly
erect; leaf usually 1, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 2–12 cm long, 1–3 cm wide; flowers 1(–2) at tip of
stem, rose-pink to white, occasionally fragrant, 15–25 mm long, resupinate (the lip therefore the
lowermost of the petals); lip heavily yellow-white bearded; capsule 2–3 cm long. Marshy areas,
seepage slopes, other wet areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by
Hatch et al. (1990); se and e TX w to at least c Henderson Co. near e margin of nc TX. Apr–Jul.

                                SPIRANTHES LADIES’-TRESSES
Roots fleshy, tuberous-thickened; stems with few leaves or none; flowers in a slender twisted or
spiraled spike; perianth narrow, almost tubular, white or partly green or yellowish.
AA mainly n temperate (few tropical) genus of 30 species; some are cultivated as ornamentals.
Spiranthes are by far the most common orchids in nc TX. (Greek: speira, a coil or spiral, and
anthos, flower, from the spiraled inflorescence)
REFERENCES: Garay 1980; Catling 1981, 1982, 1983a, 1983b; Sheviak 1982.

1. Axis of spike pubescent (use lens); leaves cauline and/or basal.
   2. Flowers in 1 secund (= 1-sided) or loose spiral; pubescence blunt to capitate (= end enlarged)
      or pointed.
      3. Lip usually widest near base, often fleshy-thickened; widespread in nc TX.
         4. Lip white with a yellow-green center; pubescence blunt to capitate ____________________ S. cernua
         4. Lip white; pubescence pointed ________________________________________________ S. vernalis
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1219




 Hexalectris warnockii [LUN]                                                      Pogonia ophioglossoides [LUN]




                                    Platanthera ciliaris [LUN]




Spiranthes cernua [LUN]                                                            Spiranthes longilabris [CO1]




                               Spiranthes lacera var. gracilis [LUN]
1220 ORCHIDACEAE/SPIRANTHES

      3. Lip usually widest near apex or lateral margins parallel, thin, membranous; rare near e mar-
         gin of nc TX __________________________________________________________________ S. praecox
   2. Flowers in 2–4 dense spirals; pubescence blunt to capitate.
      5. Perianth 5.5 mm or less long; plants delicate, slender; spike 15 mm or less in diam.; rare in nc
         TX ___________________________________________________________________________ S. ovalis
      5. Perianth > 6 mm long; plants usually large, stout (for a Spiranthes); spike usually much > 15
         mm in diam.; widespread in nc TX.
         6. Lip not constricted near the middle, with small basal tuberosities (± short conical knobs);
            leaves usually absent at flowering time; flowers slender, not inflated; lateral sepals spread-
            ing; typically in calcareous soils ________________________________________ S. magnicamporum
         6. Lip slightly to distinctly constricted near the middle, with prominent basal tuberosities
            (usually somewhat inward-curving); leaves present at flowering time; flowers appearing
            inflated; lateral sepals appressed; typically in sandy soils ______________________________ S. cernua
1. Axis of spike glabrous; leaves all basal.
   7. Perianth 5.5–11 mm long; lip 2–6 mm wide; leaves (if present) mostly 5 mm or less wide, erect
      or ascending, without a petiole, the lower portion sheathing the stem, linear to narrowly lan-
      ceolate or oblong-elliptic; flowering Mar–Jun or Oct–Dec.; rare in nc TX.
      8. Inflorescences 1-sided (rarely slightly spiraled); lip tapering from broad base to narrow ob-
         tuse apex, not marked or veined with green; flowering Oct–Dec ______________________ S. longilabris
      8. Inflorescences strongly spiraled; lip usually widest near apex, marked or veined with green;
         flowering Mar–Jun ____________________________________________________________ S. praecox
   7. Perianth 2–5.5(–7) mm long; lip 1.5–2.5 mm wide; leaves (if present) 6–25 mm wide, spreading,
      the ± short broad blades with a distinct petiole, ovate to ovate-lanceolate; flowering Jun–Nov;
      widespread in nc TX.
      9. Perianth 4–5.5(–6) mm long; lip with green or yellowish green center; roots several, in a
         fascicle _______________________________________________________________________ S. lacera
      9. Perianth up to 3(–4) mm long; lip white; root 1(–2) __________________________________ S. tuberosa

Spiranthes cernua (L.) Rich., (drooping, nodding), NODDING LADIES’-TRESSES, COMMON LADIES’-
TRESSES, LADIES’-TRESSES. Plant glabrous below, pubescent above, to 60 cm tall; leaves mostly
basal, linear to lanceolate, to 25 cm long and 2.5 cm wide; spike 1.5–2 cm thick; flowers some-
times fragrant; perianth 10–15 mm long; sepals and petals white or nearly so; lip thick, white
with yellow-green center, apically recurved and undulate or crenulate; column 3–7 mm long.
Prairies, open woodlands, sandy soils; se and e TX w to Rolling Plains and Edwards Plateau. 2n
= 60 (Sheviak 1982). Jul–Nov.

Spiranthes lacera (Raf.) Raf. var. gracilis (Bigelow) Luer, (sp.: torn; var.: graceful), SLENDER LA-
DIES’-TRESSES, GREEN-LIP LADIES’-TRESSES. Plant essentially glabrous, 20–60 cm tall; leaves all
basal, not always persisting until flowering, short petioled; leaf blades ovate, 1.5–6.5 cm long,
10–25 mm wide; flowers in 1 spiral row; lip white marked with broad green or yellowish green
stripe in center, 4–5(–6) mm long, 2–2.5 mm wide, the apex finely lacerate. Sandy woods, prai-
ries; Bell, Denton, and Grayson cos., also Dallas and Kaufman cos. (Correll 1961a); se and e TX w
to East Cross Timbers. Jun–Nov. [S. gracilis (Bigelow) L.C. Beck] m/107

Spiranthes longilabris Lindl., (long-lipped), GIANT SPIRAL ORCHID. Plant ± glabrous throughout,
12–60 cm tall; leaves when present basal, 3–10 cm long, mostly < 5 mm wide; inflorescences
with flowers projecting horizontally; flowers white or white tinged with cream, conspicuously
open; perianth 6–10 mm long; lip 3–5.5 mm wide near base (which is widest portion), recurved
apically, crenate. Low woods, wet open areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4
(Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990), no other vegetational areas cited for TX; rare if present in nc TX.
Oct–Dec.
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1221




Spiranthes magnicamporum [BML]




                                    Spiranthes ovalis [LUN]                            Spiranthes praecox [LUN]




        Spiranthes tuberosa [LUN]                                Spiranthes vernalis [LUN]
1222 POACEAE

Spiranthes magnicamporum Sheviak, (great field), GREAT PLAINS LADIES’-TRESSES. Plant pubes-
cent, to 60 cm tall; leaves linear-lanceolate, to 14 cm long and ca. 1 cm wide; spike pubescent;
flowers fragrant often with strong odor similar to vanilla; perianth 7–11 mm long; lip white
with center yellowish and fleshy, slightly crisped apically; column 3 mm long. Upland, calcare-
ous soils, prairies; Grayson, Montague, Parker, and Tarrant cos., also Cooke Co. (H. Garnett, pers.
comm.); the only TX citations given by Hatch et al. (1990) were for vegetational areas 4 and 5
(Fig 2). Sep–Nov. 2n = 30 (Sheviak 1982). Flowers appear slender with spreading sepals as com-
pared to S. cernua with inflated tubular flowers and appressed sepals. According to L. Magrath
(pers. comm.), S. magnicamporum and S. cernua may not be specifically distinct; rather they
may occupy different ends of a continuum. Sheviak (1982) indicated that while introgression
occurs between the two, they differ in chromosome number, are partially genetically isolated,
and have different ecological requirements; he recognizes them at the specific level.

Spiranthes ovalis Lindl., (oval), OCTOBER LADIES’-TRESSES, OVAL LADIES’-TRESSES. Plant glabrous
below, pubescent above, ± delicate, to only 35(–45) cm tall; leaves 2–4, basal or low on stem, 5–27
cm long, 6–15 mm wide; spike with 2 or 3 tight spirals; flowers small; perianth 3–5.5 mm long,
white; lip 4–5.3 mm long, 2.4–4 mm wide, recurved apically, wavy-crenate. Wooded areas; col-
lected by Reverchon in Dallas Co. (Correll 1961a); apparently not collected in TX since that
time. Aug–Oct. This is the only small-flowered species of Spiranthes in nc TX with the flowers
in 2 or more spirals.

Spiranthes praecox (Walter) S. Watson, (precocious), GRASS-LEAF LADIES’-TRESSES. Plant often
glabrous throughout (sometimes axis of inflorescence pubescent), 20–75 cm tall; leaves when
present up to 7, mostly basal, narrowly linear to filiform, 10–25 cm long, 1–5 mm wide; perianth
5.5–11 mm long, white, usually marked with green; lip thin, 5.5–11 mm long, 2–6 mm wide near
apex (which is widest portion), apically mostly wavy and slightly crenate. Low woods, wet
open areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990);
mainly se and e TX. Mar–Jun.

Spiranthes tuberosa Raf., (tuberous), LITTLE LADIES’-TRESSES, GRAY’S LADIES’-TRESSES. Plant 20–
40(–60) cm tall; leaves all basal, ovate, 2.5–6.5 cm long, 6–15 mm wide; flowers small, in 1 spiral
row; lip white, 2.3–4 mm long, 1.5–2 mm wide, the apex barely erose. Dry sandy woods; Lamar
Co. in Red River drainage; mainly se and e TX. Jun–Oct. [S. grayi Ames.]

Spiranthes vernalis Engelm. & A. Gray, (of spring), SPRING LADIES’-TRESSES, TWISTED LADIES’-
TRESSES, UPLAND LADIES’-TRESSES. Plant 10–90(–117) cm tall; spike about 1.6 cm thick, the rachis
and ovaries with reddish or whitish pointed hairs; perianth 5–10 mm long, usually white; lip
4.5–8 mm long, fleshy, with stout basal tuberosities, recurved, apically crenulate. Sandy woods
and prairies, moist areas; se and e TX w to Cooke and Dallas cos.; also Rolling Plains. Late Apr–
Jun. [Incl. S. reverchonii (Small) Cory]


               POACEAE (GRAMINEAE) GRASS FAMILY
Ours herbaceous annuals or perennials or woody in bamboos; roots fibrous; culms (= stems)
usually rounded, with prominent, swollen or constricted, solid nodes, the internodes hollow or
solid, and with intercalary meristem at base allowing continued elongation; tillers (= basal
branches), stolons (= above ground horizontal stems or “runners”), or rhizomes (= underground
horizontal stems) often present; leaves alternate, with tubular basal sheath enclosing the culm
and usually split to base down one side opposite the blade, and a short or elongate, usually lin-
ear, flattened or sometimes involute (= inrolled) blade, with a row of hairs or scaly membrane (=
ligule) at junction of blade and sheath on inner (upper) side, often with intercalary meristem
near the ligule; inflorescences made up of very reduced branches (called spikelets), these spike-
                                                                                                                                                POACEAE 1223

                  lets, which are the basic units of the grass inflorescence, are arranged in various ways (e.g.,
                  spikes, racemes, panicles); spikelets composed of 1–numerous flowers, associated scale-like
                  bracts (each flower and its subtending (1–)2 scale-like bracts are collectively called a floret),
                  and a short axis; florets borne 2-ranked, one above another, alternating along the concealed axis
                  (= rachilla), the spikelets usually with an additional pair of empty scale-like bracts (= glumes)
                  at base (in some only 1 glume, or none, or reduced to awns instead); flowers perfect or imperfect,
                  without true perianth, this apparently represented only by 2(–3) minute lodicules which func-
                  tion by swelling and opening the floret; florets usually with 2 alternate, overlapping scale-like
                  bracts (lemma—the outer or lower; palea—the inner or upper, which is usually smaller and
                  more delicate, sometimes absent or not visible); stamens (1–)3(–6), the anthers often dangling
                  outside the floret at anthesis to allow the wind-borne pollen to be carried away, but sometimes
                  retained within the floret; pistil 1, the typically 2(–3) stigmas usually feathery with increased
                  surface area to catch wind-blown pollen; flowers typically open only for a short time (usually
                  during morning) or not at all, wind- or self-pollinated; fruit a caryopsis (= achene-like, 1-seeded
                  fruit with ovary wall adnate to the seed coat), rarely an achene.

                  Ordinarily dissection is necessary to see the parts of the grass spikelet; because of the small size
                  of the structures involved (e.g., lemmas, paleas), a dissecting scope or at minimum a hand lens is
                  often necessary for definitive identification. In the keys, measurements of glumes, lemmas, or
                  spikelets do not include awns (= beards or bristle-like appendages) if these are present. A num-
                  ber of species of ornamental grasses are cultivated and long persist in nc TX including
                  Cortaderia selloana (Schult. & Schult. f.) Asch. & Graebn., Miscanthus sinensis Andersson,
                  Pennisetum species, and a variety of bamboos.
                  AThis huge (ca. 9,500 species in 668 genera) cosmopolitan family, on a worldwide basis, is eco-
                  logically the world’s most dominant vascular plant family, occurring over vast areas of prairie,
                  plain, steepe, and pampas; it is estimated that 20% of the world’s vegetational cover is made up
                  of grasses. The family is also economically the most important, containing all the cereal crops
                  including Oryza sativa (RICE), Triticum aestivum (WHEAT), and Zea mays (CORN), as well as Sac-
                  charum officinarum (SUGAR CANE). More than 70% of farmland worldwide is devoted to cereals,
                  which provide humans with more than 50% of all calories (Heiser 1990a). Just three plants,
                  RICE, WHEAT, AND CORN provide ca. 45% of total human caloric intake (Chrispeels & Sadava
                  1977). Most grasses are extremely well-adapted to fire, grazing, trampling, and lawn mowers.

                                  GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POACEAE (GRAMINEAE) FAMILY [JEP]

                                                                         2 florets               6 florets                       stigma lobe
                        collar                                                                                                                      anther

                                                    spikelet                                                    floret
                      node
                                                                                                                         palea                                      FLORET
           blade                                                                       awn
                                                       axis
LEAF       ligule                                                                                                                                        lemma
           sheath
                                                                                                             glume
                                                                                      glume                                                     callus
           node                                                                                                   fertile
                        blade                                                                                    lemma                         axis                  sterile
                                          panicle-like           glume                                                                                              lemma
                                 LEAF
                       ligule                                                        SPIKELETS
                                                    spike-like

                       sheath             INFLORESCENCES                                                                               axis
                                                                                       LEAF
  collar
                                                                                      blade                                                                     lower glume

 rhizome                                                                              ligule                         upper glume
                                                                                                                                                         vein
                                                                                 appendages                          collar
                                                                                     sheath
                                 root      stolon                                                                                        SPIKELET
                                                                           (sheath open)                       (sheath closed)
1224 POACEAE

This is due in part to the presence of intercalary meristems (located in the culms just above the
nodes and in the leaves near the ligules, thus allowing growth from the base even if terminal
parts are damaged) and the tendency to branch (“tiller”) or produce stolons or rhizomes near or
below ground level. Species worldwide range from tiny annuals (2–3 cm tall) to huge bamboos
40 m (ca. 130 feet) tall. Grasses are wind-pollinated and shed large amounts of pollen; this is a
major source of allergic reactions (e.g., hay fever) in humans. The Poaceae is a particularly im-
portant part of the nc TX flora; the 249 species present represent about 11% of the total species
known for the region and make the Poaceae the second largest family in nc TX (following only
the Asteraceae). (subclass Commelinidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: mostly herbs with 2-ranked leaves having sheathing bases,
free blades, and ligules; culms round, with hollow or solid internodes; flowers small, inconspicu-
ous, reduced to stamens and pistils, subtended by 2 scale-like bracts each, and arranged in very
reduced spikes called spikelets; the ± similar Cyperaceae (SEDGES) have 3-ranked leaves usually
without ligules, often 3-sided culms with solid internodes, and flowers subtended by 1 scale-
like bract each; the ± similar Juncaceae (RUSHES) have flowers with a small 6-parted perianth.
REFERENCES: Nash 1909, 1912; Nash & Hitchcock 1915; Hitchcock 1931–1939, 1935, 1951; Silveus
1933; Tharp 1952; Shinners 1954; Gould 1957b, 1968a, 1968b, 1973, 1975b, 1978; Box & Gould
1959; deWitt 1981; Stebbins 1981, 1982, 1985; Estes et al. 1982; Gould & Shaw 1983; Campbell
1985; Coughenour 1985; Dahlgren et al. 1985; Redmann 1985; Clayton & Renvoize 1986;
Soderstrom et al. 1987; Hignight et al. 1988; Tucker 1988, 1990, 1996; Crins 1991; Allen 1992;
Powell 1994; Clark et al. 1995; Kellogg et al. 1996; Peterson et al. 1997.

1. Culms woody, persisting for more than 1 season (bamboos).
   2. Culms terete (= rounded); upper nodes often puberulent; base of midvein on lower leaf sur-
      face without a mustache of hairs; branches 3–6 per node; plants native in ne part of nc TX            Arundinaria
   2. Culms flattened above node on 1 side; upper nodes glabrous; base of midvein on lower leaf
      surface often with a mustache of hairs along one side; branches usually 2(–3) per node; plants
      introduced in nc TX                                                                                  Phyllostachys
1. Culms not woody, lasting 1 season only.
   3. Plants typically 2–6 m tall, usually reed-like; inflorescence a large panicle up to ca. 60 cm long
      and 20 cm wide.
      4. Leaves distributed along much of the length of the culm; inflorescences not silvery-white
         in appearance; leaf blades 0.8–6 cm wide; stout creeping rhizomes present or absent; plants
         in extensive dense colonies or not so.
         5. Spikelets in pairs of 1 pedicelled and 1 sessile (or nearly so); plants not in dense extensive
            colonies (but culms can be clumped).
            6. Spikelets with a tuft of long hairs at base ca. as long as spikelets; awn of lemmas 5–25
               mm long.
               7. Awn of lemmas 12–25 mm long; 1 spikelet of each pair sessile, 1 pedicelled; inflores-
                  cence branches disarticulating (breaking into sections) at maturity, the pedicels fall-
                  ing with the sessile spikelets                                                             Saccharum
               7. Awn of lemmas 5–10 mm long; both spikelets of pairs pedicelled, pedicels 1–5 mm
                  long, unequal, one much shorter; inflorescence branches not disarticulating, the
                  spikelets falling from pedicels at maturity                                                Miscanthus
            6. Spikelets without a tuft of long hairs at base; awn of lemmas usually much shorter
               (usually 1.5 mm or less long) or absent                                                         Sorghum
         5. Spikelets not in pairs; plants often in extensive dense colonies.
            8. Spikelets 3–5 mm long, glabrous; florets 2 per spikelet (upper perfect, lower stami-
               nate); leaf blades 0.3–1.5 cm wide                                                    Panicum (P. virgatum)
            8. Spikelets 10–15 mm long, either with rachilla or lemmas hairy; florets 2–8 per spikelet;
               leaf blades mostly 1.5–7 cm wide.
                                                                                                      POACEAE 1225

           9. Lemmas glabrous; rachilla hairy; glumes 8 mm or less long, shorter than the lowest
              lemma                                                                                     Phragmites
           9. Lemmas hairy; rachilla glabrous; glumes 10–15 mm long, nearly as long as entire
              spikelet                                                                                      Arundo
   4. Leaves mostly at the base of the plant; inflorescences silvery-white in appearance; leaf blades
      1.5 cm or less wide; creeping rhizomes absent; culms clumped but plants not forming ex-
      tensive colonies                                                                                   Cortaderia
3. Plants usually < 2(–3+) m tall, not reed-like; inflorescences various, usually much smaller.
   10. Spikelets fused with or closely fitted into the axis of the inflorescence, forming a solid
       cylindrical or flattened spike.
       11. Inflorescences as long as or longer than the leafy portion of the culm, with (3–)4–12
           branches                                                                                 Schedonnardus
       11. Inflorescences shorter than the leafy portion of the culm, unbranched or with up to 3
           branches.
           12. Spikelets (at least upper) awned                                                           Aegilops
          12. Spikelets awnless.
              13. Spike-like inflorescences flattened, the axis exposed between the spikelets;
                  plants creeping, with flowering branches only 10–30 cm tall                  Stenotaphrum
             13. Spike-like inflorescences (or if branched, the spike-like branches) not flattened
                  or flattened only on one side, the axis not evident; plants not creeping, 30–300
                  cm or more tall.
                  14. Inflorescences 2–3 mm thick, unbranched; leaf blades 1.5–4 mm wide                  Coelorachis
                  14. Inflorescences (if unbranched, or if branched, the inflorescence branches)
                       5–8 mm thick, unbranched or with 2–3 branches; leaf blades usually 10–25
                       mm wide                                                                               Tripsacum
  10. Spikelets neither fused with nor closely fitted into the axis of the inflorescence (but may
      be sessile and appressed).
      15. Spikelets unisexual, the staminate and pistillate conspicuously different with naked
          eye observation.
          16. Spikelets with 3–6(–10) florets, conspicuously (pistillate) or inconspicuously
              (staminate) long hairy; plants 0.2–0.6 m tall                                          Poa (P. arachnifera)
          16. Spikelets with 1–2 florets, glabrous or nearly so; plants either 0.3 m or less tall OR
              0.5–3+ m tall.
              17. Plants low, 30 cm or less tall, mat-forming, usually dioecious (=staminate and
                   pistillate spikelets on different plants)                                                    Buchloe
              17. Plants much larger, not mat-forming, monoecious (= staminate and pistillate
                   spikelets on the same plant).
                   18. Staminate and pistillate spikelets in separate inflorescences; pistillate spike-
                        lets in large “cobs”; whole pistillate inflorescence covered by large, leaf-
                         like, modified leaves or bracts (= shucks)                                                 Zea
                   18. Staminate and pistillate spikelets in the same inflorescence; whole inflo-
                        rescence not covered by leaf-like shucks.
                        19. Inflorescence unbranched and spike-like OR with 2–3 spike-like
                                                                                                             Tripsacum
                        19. Inflorescence a much-branched panicle; pistillate spikelets not becom-
                              ing hard; plants usually growing in shallow water                            Zizaniopsis
      15. Spikelets perfect, or if unisexual, not conpsicuously different to the naked eye.
          20. Spikelets with 2–many perfect florets.
              21. Spikelets pedicelled (pedicels may be short)                                                    KEY A
1226 POACEAE

                 21. Spikelets sessile, or nearly sessile and so densely crowded as to conceal the
                 short pedicels                                                                                KEY B
             20. Spikelets with 1 perfect floret (staminate or reduced rudimentary florets some-
                 times present)                                                                                Key C


                                                      KEY A
1. Lemmas 1-awned from the back (not from their apex).
   2. Spikelets (excluding awns) 2.5 mm long or less; inflorescence an open panicle with numerous
      spikelets and main branches bare of spikelets below the middle                                            Aira
   2. Spikelets (excluding awns) 4 mm long or more (often much more); inflorescence not as above.
      3. Glumes 1.5–5 mm long, not longer than the lemmas (excluding awns)                                  Trisetum
      3. Glumes ca. 20–30 mm long, longer than the lemmas (excluding awns)                                     Avena
1. Lemmas awnless or awned from their apex (awn can arise between apical teeth).
   4. Glumes conspicuously longer than individual lemmas (excluding awns) and usually exceed-
      ing all of the lemmas.
      5. Spikelets 15 mm or less long (excluding awns).
         6. Lemmas awnless (but with minute mucro < 1 mm long); inflorescences many-flowered,
            10–36 cm long                                                                                    Tridens
         6. Lemmas awned, the twisted and geniculate awns usually 5–7 mm long; inflorescences
            few-flowered, to ca. 5 cm long                                                                Danthonia
      5. Spikelets 20–30 mm long (excluding awns)                                                            Avena
   4. Glumes not conspicuously longer than individual lemmas.
      7. Spikelets in several very dense 1-sided clusters at the end of branches; the branches bare
         of spikelets in their lower portions; rare introduced species                                       Dactylis
      7. Spikelets not borne as above; common native and introduced species.
         8. Ligule a membrane (may have ciliate margin, or become split or torn).
            9. Lemmas 3-nerved, the nerves often prominent.
               10. Nerves of lemmas pubescent or puberulent OR base of lemmas with long hairs;
                   lemmas with midnerve usually exserted as a short awn or mucro.
                   11. Plants annual; spikelets usually with 2–4 florets; inflorescence a panicle 3–11
                       cm long with a few rebranched primary branches, the lower branches spread-
                       ing, bare of spikelets on the lower 1/3–1/2; paleas with long cilia on upper
                       margins                                                                              Triplasis
                   11. Plants perennial; spikelets with 4–12 florets; inflorescences various, but often
                       quite different from above; paleas not ciliate on upper margins.
                       12. Inflorescences 5–35 cm or more long; culms with several nodes above base;
                           leaf margins green                                                                Tridens
                       12. Inflorescences 2–4 cm long; culms with one node above base; leaf margins
                           white                                                                          Erioneuron
               10. Nerves of lemmas not hairy; base of lemmas without long hairs; lemmas awnless.
                   13. Lemmas < 6 mm long; second glume with 1 nerve; caryopsis (= fruit) not beaked;
                       widespread and abundant in nc TX                                                    Eragrostis
                   13. Lemmas (3.8–)4.6–10.8 mm long; second glume with 3–5 nerves; caryopsis
                       beaked; rare if present in nc TX                                                   Diarrhena
            9. Lemmas 5–many-nerved, the nerves prominent or sometimes so obscure as to be
               almost unnoticeable.
               14. Lemmas awned.
                   15. Spikelets (12–)15–35 mm long, if spikelets at the lower end of this size range
                       then lemmas 2-toothed or minutely notched at apex.
                       16. Lemmas not 2-toothed or notched at apex, rather tapering to a 10–20 mm
                                                                                           POACEAE 1227

           awn from an entire apex; inflorescence a spike or spicate raceme of 1–5
           large stiffly erect spikelets; spikelets 2–3.5 cm long, usually with 9–18 flo-
           rets; rare in nc TX                                                            Brachypodium
       16. Lemmas often 2-toothed or minutely notched at apex, with 1–18 mm long
           awn arising from between teeth or notch; inflorescences not as above; spike-
           lets various; very common in nc TX                                                   Bromus
   15. Spikelets < 15(–18) mm long (often much less), if spikelets at the upper end of
       this size range then lemmas not 2-toothed or notched at apex.
       17. Lemmas awned from (or just below) a conspicuously 2-toothed apex, the
           awn geniculate                                                                      Trisetum
       17. Lemmas awned from an entire or minutely and indistinctly notched apex,
           the awn straight.
           18. Leaf blades 0.1–2.5 mm wide; plants annual; stamens 1, infrequently 3;
                plants 5–70 cm tall                                                               Vulpia
           18. Leaf blades 2.5–12 mm wide; plants perennial; stamens 3; plants 50–
               120(–200) cm tall                                                        Festuca
14. Lemmas awnless.
    19. Spikelets 6–20 mm wide, (10–)20–50 mm long, conspicuously flattened, with
        1–4 sterile (empty) lemmas below fertile                                  Chasmanthium
    19. Spikelets much smaller, not conspicuously flattened; spikelets without sterile
        lemmas below fertile.
        20. Lemmas as wide as long, spreading at right angles, inflated with the mar-
            gins outspread                                                                         Briza
        20. Lemmas longer than wide, not spreading at right angles, not inflated, the
            margins clasping the paleas.
            21. Lemmas rounded on back, without prominent keel or raised midnerve
                except near apex.
                22. Upper florets sterile, much reduced to a small “rudiment” usually
                    broadest near apex; glumes thin, papery at least on margins and
                      apices; leaf sheaths with margins united except at summit                  Melica
                22. Upper florets ± like the lower; glumes not thin and papery; leaf
                    sheaths open down one side (edges may overlap) except in
                    Glyceria which has sheath margins united.
                    23. Leaf blades mostly 10–20 mm wide, with prominent midrib;
                        caryopsis (= fruit) beaked, turgid, conspicuously exserted from
                        the lemma and palea at maturity                                       Diarrhena
                    23. Leaf blades usually 1–12 mm wide, the midrib not prominent;
                        caryopsis neither beaked, turgid, nor conspicuously exserted.
                        24. Lemmas with nerves (usually 7) strongly and uniformly
                             developed and equally spaced; leaf sheaths with margins
                             united except at summit                                            Glyceria
                        24. Lemmas with several indistinct nerves or none on each side;
                             leaf sheaths open down one side (edges may overlap).
                             25. Plants perennial, usually much > 30 cm tall; either
                                  spikelets 10–15(–18) mm long OR if smaller then lower
                                  panicle branches bare of spikelets in their lower 1/3–
                                  1/2                                                           Festuca
                             25. Plants annual, to only 15(–30) cm tall; spikelets 5–7
                                  mm long; panicle branches with spikelets nearly to
                                  base                                                       Desmazeria
1228 POACEAE

                       21. Lemmas keeled or with prominent midnerve from tip to base.
                           26. Plants strongly rhizomatous, of alkaline or alkaline-saline habitats;
                               leaves 2-ranked with sheaths conspicuously overlapping; spike-
                               lets unisexual, the similar staminate and pistillate inflorescences
                               on separate plants; spikelets usually 5–20-flowered, 6–18(–28) mm;
                               rare in nc TX, known only from Brown and Comanche cos.                     Distichlis
                           26. Plants not rhizomatous or not conspicuously so, of various habi-
                               tats; leaves not as above; spikelets various; widespread in nc TX.
                               27. Spikelets (12–)15–35 mm long                                            Bromus
                               27. Spikelets 1.5–11(–12) mm long.
                                    28. Panicles 1–3(–4.5) cm long, overtopped by the leaves; lem-
                                         mas obtuse, with 5(–7) prominent, raised, almost parallel
                                         nerves; culms to only 10(–18) cm long                         Sclerochloa
                                   28. Panicles 3–25 cm long, exserted above the foliage; lem-
                                       mas acute to obtuse, without 5 prominent, raised, almost
                                       parallel nerves; culms of variable length, often much more
                                       than 18 cm long.
                                       29. Lemmas often puberulent, the base of lemma often
                                           with long, kinky hairs; upper glume only slightly wider
                                           than lower glume (much less than 2 times as wide)                    Poa
                                       29. Lemmas glabrous or merely scabrous, the base of
                                           lemma lacking hairs; upper glume much wider than
                                           lower (2 times as wide or wider).
                                           30. Upper glume widest near middle, slightly pointed
                                               at apex; main axis of inflorescence puberulent; dis-
                                               articulation above glumes                                   Koeleria
                                           30. Upper glume widest near apex, with cupped, blunt
                                               apex; main axis of inflorescence glabrous or mi-
                                               nutely scabrous; disarticulation below glumes
                                                                                                       Sphenopholis
     8. Ligule of hairs entirely, or with membranous base less than half the total length.
        31. Spikelets 6–20 mm wide, (10–)20–50 mm long, conspicuously flattened                       Chasmanthium
        31. Spikelets much smaller, not at all flattened or only slightly so.
            32. Inflorescence an elongate, narrow, stiffly erect, spike-like panicle with a few widely
                spaced, usually short side branches; lower 1–2 florets sterile; only in extreme ne
                part of nc TX (Lamar Co.)                                                             Chasmanthium
            32. Inflorescences various, but usually quite different from above; lower florets fer-
                tile; widespread in nc TX.
                33. Lemmas with entire pointed apex; nerves of lemmas not hairy; base of lem-
                      mas without long hairs                                                              Eragrostis
                33. Lemmas with notched or rounded-truncate apex (can be short awned from
                      the notch); nerves of lemmas pubescent or puberulent OR base of lemmas
                      with long hairs.
                      34. Plants annual; spikelets usually with 2–4 florets; inflorescence a panicle
                          3–11 cm long with a few rebranched primary branches, the lower
                          branches spreading, bare of spikelets on the lower 1/3–1/2; paleas with
                          long cilia on upper margins                                                       Triplasis
                      34. Plants perennial; spikelets with 4–12 florets; inflorescences various, but
                          often quite different from above; paleas not ciliate on upper margins.
                                                                                                        POACEAE 1229

                           35. Inflorescences 5–35 cm or more long; culms with several nodes above
                               base; leaf margins green                                                          Tridens
                           35. Inflorescences 2–4 cm long; culms with one node above base; leaf
                               margins white                                                                Erioneuron


                                                       KEY B
1. Spikelets borne on opposite sides of the zigzag, usually flattened, main axis of the inflorescence;
   inflorescence unbranched, consisting of a solitary, 2-sided spike or spike-like raceme.
   2. Glumes 3.6 mm or more wide                                                                                 Triticum
   2. Glumes 1.0–3.5 mm wide.
      3. Lemmas minutely spiny-ciliate on keel and margins (the hairs visible with the naked eye
         and obvious with a lens)                                                                                   Secale
      3. Lemmas not minutely spiny-ciliate on keel and margins.
         4. Spikelets solitary at each node of the inflorescence.
            5. Spikelets with 1 glume, oriented with edge (back of lemmas) facing inflorescence axis               Lolium
            5. Spikelets with 2 glumes, oriented with side facing inflorescence axis                         Pascopyrum
         4. Spikelets 2–3 at each node of the inflorescence.
            6. Lemmas awnless (glumes can have awns up to 5 mm long); plants 30 cm or less tall
               with leaf blades 3 mm or less wide; inflorescences to 3.5 cm long                                   Hilaria
            6. Lemmas conspicuously awned or sometimes awnless; plants usually much > 30 cm
               tall; leaf blades usually much > 3 mm wide; inflorescences usually > 3.5 cm long.
               7. Spikelets 1-flowered, in groups of 3 per node (lateral ones may be reduced to group
                  of awns)                                                                                      Hordeum
               7. Spikelets 2–12-flowered, 2–3 per node.
                  8. Lemmas awnless or with awns to only 3 mm long; spikelets 5–12-flowered,
                      solitary or sometimes 2 per middle and lower nodes                                     Pascopyrum
                  8. Lemmas with prominent awns 5–50 mm long; spikelets 2–6-flowered, usually
                      2–3 per node                                                                                 Elymus
1. Spikelets not on opposite sides of a main axis, rather borne all on 1 side or on all sides of the
   main axis or its branches; inflorescence usually branched, consisting of 2–many spikes, racemes,
   or panicles (condensed to open) OR if unbranched then not distinctly 2-sided.
   9. Spikelets in several very dense, 1-sided clusters at the end of branches bare of spikelets in
      their lower portions; rare introduced species                                                               Dactylis
   9. Spikelets not borne as above; common native and introduced species.
      10. Plants 5–15(–30) cm tall; inflorescences usually 1–9 cm long and 19 mm or less wide.
           11. Spikelets with 3–4 florets, falling as a unit (disarticulation below glumes); inflorescences
                usually 1–3(–4.5) cm long, overtopped by the upper leaves; lemmas obtuse,
                prominently 5-nerved, the lowest lemma ca. 5 mm long                                          Sclerochloa
           11. Spikelets with (4–)5–9(–10) florets, not falling as a unit (disarticulation above glumes);
                inflorescences usually 3–9 cm long, exserted beyond upper leaves; lemmas broadly
                acute, obscurely nerved, the lowest lemma ca. 2.5 mm long                                     Desmazeria
      10. Plants usually much larger; inflorescences usually much larger.
           12. Spikelets not borne on 1 side of the inflorescence axis or its branches, instead spike-
                lets borne crowded on all sides of the axis or on short, crowded branchlets, the whole
                inflorescence narrow, usually a dense spike or spike-like or head-like.
                13. Inflorescences not dense, the main axis clearly visible at a glance (spikelets crowded
                     on well-separated short side branches); lowermost lemma sterile, not very differ-
                     ent from glumes in size or appearance                                                 Chasmanthium
                13. Inflorescences dense, the main axis often obscured by the numerous spikelets;
1230 POACEAE

                 lowermost lemma perfect, sometimes quite different from glumes in size or
                 appearance.
                  14. Lemma nerves pubescent, at least in lower portion, or base of lemma long-
                      hairy; spikelets with 4–11 florets; lemmas rounded at apex or usually notched
                      and thus 2-toothed, sometimes with mid-vein exerted as a mucro                           Tridens
                  14. Lemma nerves and base of lemma glabrous or nearly so; spikelets with 2–4
                      florets; lemmas pointed or rounded, not notched.
                      15. Upper glume widest near middle, slightly pointed at apex; main inflores-
                           cence axis puberulent; disarticulation above glumes                                Koeleria
                      15. Upper glume widest near apex, with cupped, blunt apex; main inflores-
                           cence axis glabrous or minutely scabrous; disarticulation below glumes
                                                                                                          Sphenopholis
         12. Spikelets borne on 1 side of the inflorescence axis or its branches, often in 2 distinct
             rows, the inflorescence with 2–many, distinct, short or long, digitately arranged or scat-
             tered, spicate branches.
             16. Branches of inflorescence distributed (scattered) along main axis, usually only 1
                 arising per node, not crowded together.
                 17. Spikelets not crowded on branches, usually not overlapping adjacent spikelet
                                                                                                      Eragrostis
                 17. Spikelets often rather crowded, usually overlapping adjacent spikelet           Leptochloa
             16. Branches of inflorescence digitate (all arising together at very tip of flowering
                 culm) or nearly so or verticillate (in whorls).
                 18. Lemmas and glumes awnless                                                          Eleusine
                 18. Lemmas and/or glumes with awns.
                     19. Axis of each spicate inflorescence branch projecting as a stiff point be-
                         yond terminal spikelet; second glume mucronate or with a short awn;
                         spikelets with 3–5 perfect florets                                      Dactyloctenium
                     19. Axis of each spicate inflorescence branch not projecting as a stiff point
                         beyond terminal spikelet; second glume neither mucronate nor with a
                         short awn; spikelets with 1–2 perfect florets                                   Chloris


                                                      KEY C
1. Spikelets in pairs (1 sessile or nearly so and 1 pedicelled, both pedicelled at branch tips), the
   pedicelled spikelet similar to sessile spikelet or usually reduced or absent (often represented by
   an empty pedicel); pedicels flattened, with long-ciliate margins.
   2. Individual inflorescences usually less than 6 cm long.
      3. Inflorescence of a single spike-like raceme per peduncle (each terminal branchlet with a
         single raceme above the uppermost leaf )                                                         Schizachyrium
      3. Inflorescence a panicle or of 2 or more racemes or spikes per peduncle (each terminal
         branchlet with 2–many inflorescence branches, racemes, or spikes above the uppermost
         leaf ).
         4. Pedicelled spikelets smaller (shorter or narrower, usually rudimentary, vestigial, or absent)
            than the sessile spikelets, tapered to a narrow apex; extremely widespread and abundant
            native and introduced species.
            5. Pedicels and internodes of inflorescence branches neither strongly flattened nor
                grooved on both sides (can be slightly flattened or grooved on one side), the central
                portion thus neither thin nor membraneous                                                   Andropogon
            5. Pedicels and usually upper internodes of inflorescence branches strongly flattened
                and grooved on both sides, the central portion thus thin to membranaceous, often
                easily ruptured with a probe                                                               Bothriochloa
                                                                                                                POACEAE 1231

        4. Pedicelled spikelets ca. the same size as the sessile spikelets, rounded apically; introduced
           species known in nc TX only from Coryell Co. in Lampasas Cut Plain                            Dichanthium
  2. Individual inflorescences usually over 7 cm long.
     6. Pedicelled spikelet absent, represented only by the hairy pedicel; awn of lemmas usually
        12–35 mm long                                                                                    Sorghastrum
     6. Pedicelled spikelet present; awn of lemmas shorter or absent (Miscanthus and Sorghum or)
        or 12–25 mm long (Saccharum).
        7. Spikelets with a tuft of long hairs at base ca. as long as spikelets; awn of lemmas 5–25
           mm long.
           8. Awn of lemmas 12–25 mm long; 1 spikelet of pairs sessile, 1 pedicelled; spikelets ca. 6–
              8 mm long; inflorescence branches disarticulating (breaking into sections) at maturity,
              the pedicels falling with the sessile spikelets                                              Saccharum
           8. Awn of lemmas 5–10 mm long; both spikelets of pairs pedicelled, pedicels 1–5 mm
              long, unequal, one much shorter; spikelets 4–5.5 mm long; inflorescence branches not
              disarticulating, the spikelets falling from pedicels at maturity                            Miscanthus
        7. Spikelets without a tuft of long hairs at base; awn of lemmas usually much shorter (usu-
           ally 1.5 mm or less long) or absent                                                              Sorghum
1. Spikelets in pairs or not, but usually not in sessile-pedicelled pairs; pedicels glabrous or evenly
   pubescent on all sides, or pedicels absent.
   9. Spikelets surrounded by an involucre of prickly or smooth scales, spines, or bristles.
      10. Involucre of scales or spines that are flattened at least at base, these sharply prickly or not so.
          11. Involucres smooth, not prickly, not painful to the touch                                               Buchloe
          11. Involucres sharply prickly, very painful to the touch (SANDBURS)                                      Cenchrus
      10. Involucre of bristles (not flattened), these not sharply prickly.
          12. Bristles remaining when the spikelets fall, usually < 20 mm long                                        Setaria
          12. Bristles falling with the spikelets, the longer bristles > 20 mm long, often 40–50 mm
              or more                                                                                             Pennisetum
   9. Spikelets without a well-developed involucre (may have ring or collar at base).
      13. Reduced floret or florets present below the perfect floret (the reduced ones staminate or
          sterile, sometimes represented only by a sterile lemma); spikelets awnless.
          14. Lemmas strongly compressed, sharply keeled; inflorescences spike-like; reduced flo-
               rets 2 per spikelet, rudimentary or scale-like, their lemmas not similar to the second
               glume; disarticulation above glumes                                                                   Phalaris
          14. Lemmas usually not as above; inflorescences various, spike-like to very different; re-
               duced floret 1 per spikelet, the lemma similar to the second glume; disarticulation
               below glumes                                                                                            Key D
      13. Reduced floret below the perfect floret absent (reduced florets found above the perfect
          or absent or seemingly so); spikelets awnless or awned.
          15. Spikelets usually borne along 1 side of the often flattened inflorescence branches,
               usually in 2 rows, and/or inflorescences of spike-like branches bearing sessile spike-
               lets to very base; spikelets sessile or nearly so.
              16. Branches of inflorescence digitate (all arising together at very tip of flowering culm)
                    or nearly so or verticillate (in whorls).
                    17. Spikelets awnless; inflorescence branches usually 2–5(–7); rudimentary floret
                        absent or present only as a minute scale                                                    Cynodon
                    17. Spikelets usually awned (can be awnless in Eustachys); inflorescence branches
                        3–20 or more, variously arranged; rudimentary floret or florets present above
                        perfect floret.
                        18. Lemma of perfect floret awned, the awns usually conspicuous; widespread
                             and common in nc TX                                                                      Chloris
1232 POACEAE

                  18. Lemma of perfect floret awnless, sometimes mucronate or minutely
                      aristate; rare in nc TX, mainly to the e                                            Eustachys
          16. Branches of inflorescence distributed along flowering culm, usually only one aris-
              ing per node.
              19. Plants dwarf, mat-formers to only ca. 30 cm tall; inflorescence branches 1–4,
                  usually 6–14 mm long; plants dioecious, male and female flowers on different
                  plants; spikelets awnless or nearly so                                                    Buchloe
              19. Plants often larger; inflorescence branches 1–80, 8–150 mm long; plants not
                  dioecious, each spikelet with 1 perfect floret; spikelets awned or awnless.
                  20. Lemmas awnless; leaf blades 3 mm or less wide; spikelets neither densely
                      arranged and comb-like on the side branches nor loosely arranged on the
                      main axis.
                      21. Inflorescence branches spreading, 2–10(–20) cm long; glumes stiff
                                                                                              Schedonnardus
                      21. Inflorescence branches appressed, usually 2–3 cm long; glumes
                          soft                                                                   Willkommia
                  20. Lemmas usually awned; leaf blades less than to much more than 3 mm
                      wide; if less than 5 mm wide then the spikelets either densely arranged
                      and comb-like on the side branches or loosely arranged on the main axis.
                      22. Inflorescences mostly wider than long with widely spreading panicle
                           branches mostly 10–20 cm long; leaf blades lanceolate, rather broad
                           in appearance for a grass, abruptly narrowed at base                Gymnopogon
                       22. Inflorescences mostly longer than wide with spreading to appressed
                            branches to 15 cm long but usually much shorter; leaf blades linear,
                            narrow in appearance, not abruptly narrowed at base.
                            23. Spikelets without rudimentary florets; inflorescence branches usu-
                                 ally appressed, usually 4–15 cm long                                      Spartina
                            23. Spikelets with 1–several rudimentary or staminate florets above
                                 the perfect floret; inflorescence branches spreading, 5 cm or less
                                 long                                                                    Bouteloua
      15. Spikelets not borne along 1 side of the inflorescence branches; inflorescences with-
          out spike-like branches having spikelets to very base; spikelets sessile or pedicelled.
          24. Spikelets in clusters of 3 per node (laterals often reduced, staminate or sterile);
              spikelets sessile.
              25. Lemmas awned; inflorescence axis usually disarticulating at maturity, the sec-
                  tions falling with the spikelets; spikes usually 4–10 cm long                           Hordeum
              25. Lemmas awnless; inflorescence axis not disarticulating, a cluster of 3 spikelets
                  falling as a unit from the inflorescence axis; spikes 2–3.5 cm long                        Hilaria
          24. Spikelets not 3 per node; spikelets sessile or on pedicels.
              26. Glumes absent, the caryopsis (= fruit) thus subtended by only 2 scale-like
                  bracts (lemma and palea); inflorescence a panicle with spreading branches.
                  27. Lemmas hispid or hispidulous, the hairs sometimes conspicuous, awn-
                        less, 5-nerved, the lateral nerves marginal; spikelets 2.5–5.5 mm long; aerial
                        culms 3 mm or less thick, 0.7–1.5 m tall                                             Leersia
                  27. Lemmas glabrous, awned, 7-nerved, the lateral nerves not marginal; spike-
                        lets 6–8 mm long; aerial culms stout, 5–15 mm thick, 1.5–2.5(–3) m tall          Zizaniopsis
              26. Glumes present, the caryopsis thus subtended by more than 2 scale-like bracts
                  (lemma, palea, glume(s)); inflorescences various.
                  28. Lemmas hard, closed except in anthesis, permanently enclosing caryopsis,
                                                                                    POACEAE 1233

    narrowly fusiform-cylindrical (shaped like a fat needle broadest near
    middle), with a sharp-pointed callus at base, with 1 or 3 stiff or wiry awns.
    29. Lemmas with 1 awn; ring of hairs present at base of awn                          Nassella
    29. Lemmas with 3 awns; ring of hairs at base of awn absent                          Aristida
28. Lemmas neither hard nor permanently enclosing caryopsis, open down
    one side, variously shaped, but not as above, usually without a sharp-pointed
    callus, with a single awn or awnless.
    30. Glumes and lemmas both awnless.
         31. Glumes both as long as or longer than lemma.
              32. Panicles dense, spike-like, 30 mm or less wide.
                   33. Fertile lemmas 0.9–1.5 mm long (the single lemma al-
                        ways fertile), glabrous; inflorescences 10–30 mm wide            Agrostis
                   33. Fertile lemmas 3–6.8 mm long, pubescent (2 reduced
                        sterile lemmas also present); inflorescences 8–18(–20)
                        mm wide                                                          Phalaris
            32. Panicles open, not spike-like, 20–250 mm wide                            Agrostis
        31. Glumes, at least the first, shorter than lemma.
            34. Lemmas 1-nerved; fruit dropping from lemma and palea at
                maturity; seed loose, not fused to ovary wall; ligule a minute
                ring of hairs with membranous base                                   Sporobolus
            34. Lemmas 3-nerved, the lateral nerves sometimes faint; fruit
                 enclosed in lemma and palea at maturity; seed fused to ovary
                 wall; ligule a short membrane, usually without hairs              Muhlenbergia
    30. Glumes OR lemmas awned.
        35. Inflorescence very dense, spike-like.
            36. Glumes awned; lemma awnless or with an awn to ca. 1 mm
                long arising from the apex of the lemma.
                37. Awns of glumes 0.8–1.5 mm long, abrupt from unnotched
                     apex; inflorescences 5–9 mm wide; lemma awnless                     Phleum
                37. Awns of glumes 5–9 mm long, from apical notch; inflo-
                     rescences 10–30 mm wide; lemma with a delicate awn
                     ca. 1 mm long                                                    Polypogon
            36. Glumes awnless; lemma with awn 3–5 mm long arising at or
                near the base of the lemma                                           Alopecurus
        35. Inflorescence usually an open or sometimes contracted panicle,
            not spike-like.
            38. Lemmas usually awned from an entire or very minutely cleft
                 apex or awnless; glumes, at least the first, usually shorter than
                 lemma, awnless or awned                                           Muhlenbergia
            38. Lemmas awned from back, just below tip to near middle;
                 glumes equaling or exceeding lemma, awnless.
                 39. Panicles contracted, dense, narrow, ca. 10 mm wide; spike-
                     lets 3–4 mm long (excluding awns)                                 Limnodea
                 39. Panicles open, very diffuse, > 15 mm wide; spikelets 1.2–
                     2.2 mm long.
                      40. Awn arising near middle of back of lemma, ca. 2 mm
                           long; florets 2 per spikelet (though only 1 with awned
                           lemma and thus appearing as if only 1 floret)                     Aira
                      40. Awn arising just below tip of lemma, 4–8 mm long;
                           floret 1 per spikelet                                         Agrostis
1234 POACEAE

                                                       KEY D
1. Spikelets with 2 well-developed, outer, scale-like bracts (excluding the tough or hard and grain-
   like fertile lemma), the 3rd if present, much reduced, less than 1/4 as long or 1/2 as wide as the
   others.
   2. Spikelets long-pedicelled, widely separated in open panicle                                   Digitaria (Leptoloma)
   2. Spikelets sessile or short-pedicelled, the inflorescence or its branches with closely spaced spike-
      lets, the spikelets often overlapping one another or nearly so.
      3. Pedicels with a prominent collar-like or cup-like structure (modified glume) just under the
         spikelet (obvious with a lens)                                                                         Eriochloa
      3. Pedicels without collar-like or cup-like structure.
         4. Spikelets with well-developed pedicels, or both sessile and pedicelled together, in panicles
             or narrow racemes.
             5. Lemmas with silky hairs longer than the spikelet                                                 Digitaria
             5. Lemmas short-pubescent or glabrous                                                              Sorghum
         4. Spikelets sessile or subsessile, on a flattened inflorescence branch, the inflorescence
             consisting of 1 or more spikes or spike-like racemes.
             6. Spikelets lanceolate to oblong or suborbicular, obtuse or acute, 0.8–2.5 times
                as long as wide; inflorescence branches either only 2 apically or scattered along main
                inflorescence axis, not digitately arranged; fertile lemma with relatively thick margins,
                these inrolled over edges of the palea.
                7. Inflorescence with 2–many branches; rounded back of fertile lemma facing the
                   axis of the inflorescence branch; spikelets closely packed and often paired, in 2 or 4
                   rows, 1.6–4.8 mm long; widespread in nc TX                                                  Paspalum
                7. Inflorescence with 2–4 branches; rounded back of fertile lemma facing away
                   from the axis of the inflorescence branch; spikelets more widely spaced (only slightly
                   overlapping), not in pairs, in 2 rows, 1.8–2.2(–2.6) mm long; in nc TX only known
                   from extreme e margin                                                                       Axonopus
             6. Spikelets narrowly lanceolate, gradually acute, 3–4 times as long as wide; inflorescence
                branches digitately arranged or scattered along main inflorescence axis, never only 2
                apically; fertile lemma with thin and flat margins, these not inrolled over the palea
                                                                                                                 Digitaria
1. Spikelets with 3 or 4 well-developed, outer, scale-like bracts (3rd or 4th may be much shorter
   than rest, but nearly as wide).
   8. Inflorescences with an easily discernable central axis bearing relatively few (1–ca. 30) discrete
      unbranched spike-like racemes, these racemes usually discernible at a glance.
      9. Inflorescences usually with only 2 paired spike-like racemes at end of culm; plants
         of wet habitats                                                                          Paspalum (P. distichum)
      9. Inflorescences not as above; plants of various habitats.
         10. Second glume and lower lemma usually with brownish glandular blotches;
              spike-like racemes usually 2–5; in nc TX known only from Tarrant Co.                   Paspalum (P. langei)
         10. Second glume and lower lemma without brownish glandular blotches; spike-like
              racemes 1–ca. 30; widespread in nc TX.
              11. First glume > 1/2 as long as the spikelet (excluding awns).
                    12. First glume awnless                                                                     Urochloa
                    12. First glume with an awn 5–10 mm long                                                Oplismenus
              11. First glume 1/2 or less as long as the spikelet.
                   13. Glumes and lemmas awnless; first glume rounded apically; inflorescence
                        branches winged or not winged.
                        14. Inflorescence branches winged; inflorescences with 2–6 branches                     Urochloa
                                                                                        AEGILOPS/POACEAE 1235

                    14. Inflorescence branches not winged; inflorescences with 7–17
                         branches                                                                     Paspalidium
                13. Glumes or lemmas awned or awnless; first glume acute apically; inflo-
                    rescence branches not winged                                                      Echinochloa
  8. Inflorescences without a conspicuous central axis, the branches usually rebranched,
     discrete spike-like racemes not easily discernable.
     15. Spikelets asymmetric at base, the second glume with a pouch- or sac-like swelling at base;
         first glume greatly reduced, 1/4 or less as long as second glume; in nc TX known only
         from Lamar Co. in Red River drainage                                                          Sacciolepis
     15. Spikelets various, but not as above; widespread and extremely common in nc TX                   Panicum


                                                 AEGILOPS
AA genus of 21 species native from the Mediterranean to c Asia and Pakistan. Related to Triti-
cum and one species is thought to have possibly contributed a genome to polyploid WHEAT.
(Classical Latin name for wheat or a kind of wild oat) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Triticeae)
REFERENCES: Gupta & Baum 1986, 1989.

Aegilops cylindrica Host, (cylindrical), JOINTED GOAT GRASS. Annual 35–75 cm tall; leaf sheaths
glabrous except on margins; leaf blades with flaring base projecting to form small, sometimes
indistinct auricles; ligule a membrane < 1 mm long; inflorescence a slender, cylindrical, pencil-
like spike, the spikelets closely fitted into niches in the unbranched, flattened, bilateral axis of
the inflorescence; disarticulation usually first in lowest node of inflorescence axis, the spike
falling whole; spikelets sessile, 2–5-flowered, the upper florets reduced; glumes rounded, asym-
metrical; lemmas and glumes of upper spikelets long-awned, the awns ca. 3–8 cm long. Road-
sides and disturbed sites, limestone areas; Dallas, Denton, Grayson, and McLennan cos.; wide-
spread in TX. Apr–Jun. Native of se Europe and adjacent Asia. [Triticum cylindricum (Host)
Ces., Pass. & Gibson] I

                                       AGROSTIS BENT GRASS
Glabrous annuals or perennials; ligule a membrane; inflorescence an open panicle; spikelets 1-
flowered; florets separating above glumes; glumes equaling or exceeding the lemma; paleas
short or absent; lemmas awned or awnless.
AA cosmopolitan, but especially n temperate genus of 220 species; a number are important
for use in lawns and pastures. (Old Greek name for grass from agros, a field) (subfamily
Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)
REFERENCE: Hitchcock 1905.

1. Lemmas awned (awns 4–8 mm long); plants annual                                                     A. elliottiana
1. Lemmas awnless; plants perennial.
   2. Spikelets 1.5–2.1 mm long; lemmas 1–1.3(–1.5) mm long; native and widespread in nc TX
                                                                                                      A. hyemalis
  2. Spikelets (at least some) (2–)2.2–3(–3.2) mm long; lemmas 1.3–2 mm long; introduced into nc
     TX or native only to the extreme ne portion.
     3. Panicles with main branches rebranched only towards the tips, the spikelets clus-
        tered near the tips; primary panicle branches (at least some) usually 5–15 cm or more long;
        mainly w TX, rarely introduced elsewhere; spring flowering except in w TX (form of A.
        hyemnalis previously recognized as A. scabra)                                                 A. hyemalis
     3. Panicles with main branches rebranched near or below the middle, the spikelets not clus-
        tered near the tips; primary panicle branches usually 5 cm or less long, infrequently more;
        e TX w to Lamar Co.; usually flowering in fall                                              A. perennans
1236 POACEAE/AIRA

Agrostis elliottiana Schult., (for Stephen Elliott, 1771–1830, Carolinian botanist), ELLIOTT’S BENT
GRASS, ANNUAL TICKLE GRASS. Annual 10–40 cm tall; leaf blades 1.6 mm or less wide; panicles
delicate, becoming very open; spikelets 1.2–2.2 mm long; lemmas 1.1–2 mm long, with awn 4–8
mm long from just below apex, rarely awnless. Sandy soils, disturbed sites; Burnet, Dallas
(Reverchon, Apr 1876), Denton, Grayson, Hunt, Navarro, and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to East
Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. Apr–May.

Agrostis hyemalis (Walter) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (of winter), TICKLE GRASS, SPRING BENT
GRASS, WINTER BENT GRASS, FLY-AWAY GRASS. Tufted perennial 15–75(–80) cm tall; leaf blades 0.5–
3(–4) mm wide; panicles narrow at start of flowering, later becoming very open; primary
panicle branches in whorls, at least some 5–15 cm or more long. Open areas, usually sandy soils;
Dallas, Denton, Grayson, Hunt, and Lamar cos.; throughout much of TX. Late Apr–early Jun. [A.
scabra Willd.] Gould (1975b) and Kartesz (1994) recognized A. scabra as a distinct species; how-
ever, we are following Jones et al. (1997) and S. Hatch (pers. comm.) in lumping this taxon with
A. hyemalis.

Agrostis perennans (Walter) Tuck., (perennial), AUTUMN BENT GRASS. Clumped perennial 30–
80(–100) cm tall; leaf blades 1–6 mm wide. Moist sand along wooded streams, open oak woods;
Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); e TX w to ne corner of nc TX. Aug–Oct, occasionally in spring.

                                      AIRA HAIR GRASS
AA genus of 10 species of Europe and the Mediterranean region to Iran; also widely distrib-
uted as weeds. (An ancient Greek name for some grass, perhaps darnel—Lolium temulentum L.)
(subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)
REFERENCE: Brown & Peterson 1984.

Aira caryophyllea L. var. capillaris Mutel, (sp.: clove-like scent; var.: resembling hair, very slen-
der), ANNUAL HAIR GRASS. Delicate tufted annual to ca. 35 cm tall; leaf blades usually 0.5 mm or
less wide; ligules 1.5–4 mm long, white, membranous; panicles delicate, very open and diffuse,
4–12 cm long; spikelets 2-flowered, ca. 2 mm long excluding awn; glumes longer than the lem-
mas; lower lemma awnless; lemma of upper floret awned from near middle of back, the awn ca.
2 mm long. Sandy open areas; Grayson, Lamar, and Tarrant cos.; mainly e TX. Apr–Jun. Native of
Europe. [A. capillaris Host, A. elegans Willd. ex Roem. & Schult., A. elegantissima Schur] Gould
(1975b) and Kartesz (1994) treated this taxon as A. elegans; however, we are following Jones et al.
(1997) and S. Hatch (pers. comm.) in recognizing it as A. caryophyllea var. capillaris. I

Aira caryophyllea L. var. caryophyllea, was reported by Carr (1994) as occurring in Lamar Co.
This European native is extremely similar to var. capillaris except the lower floret as well as the
upper has an awn. I

                                  ALOPECURUS FOXTAIL
AA genus of 36 species of the n temperate zone and South America. (Greek: alopex, fox, and
oura, tail) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)

Alopecurus carolinianus Walter, (of Carolina), CAROLINA FOXTAIL. Glabrous, green or usually
blue-green annual 7–35 cm tall; ligule a membrane 3.5–7 mm long; inflorescence a dense, cylin-
drical, spike-like panicle 2–6 cm long and 4–6 mm in diam.; spikelets strongly compressed, 1-
flowered; glumes silky-pubescent; lemmas with 3–5 mm awn from back near base, the awn
geniculate medianly. Sandy soils; Bell, Grayson, and Wise cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); se
and e TX w to nc TX, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun.
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1237




 Aegilops cylindrica [REE]      Agrostis elliottiana [USB]                     Agrostis hyemalis [HI1]




 Agrostis perennans [USB]    Aira caryophyllea var. capillaris [SIL]          Alopecurus carolinianus [HI1]




Andropogon gerardii [GO1]     Andropogon glomeratus [USB]                     Andropogon gyrans [USB]
1238 POACEAE/ANDROPOGON

                           ANDROPOGON BLUESTEM, BEARD GRASS
Perennials; culms stiffly erect; ligules membranous; inflorescences paniculate, of 2–several spi-
cate branches; spikelets in pairs: one sessile, perfect, the other pedicellate, staminate, neuter, ru-
dimentary, or absent (represented by pedicel only); disarticulation so that sessile spikelet falls
with associated pedicel and section of the inflorescence branch; first glume large, firm, tightly
clasping or enclosing second glume; perfect spikelet with 2 florets, the lower neuter, often vesti-
gial; lemma of perfect (upper) floret awned or awnless.
AA genus of ca. 100 species of tropical and warm areas of the world. It has sometimes been
circumscribed more broadly to include such genera as Bothriochloa, Dichanthium, and
Schizachyrium. (Greek: aner (andr), man, and pogon, beard, referring to the hairy staminate
spikelets) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Gould 1957a, 1967; Campbell 1983, 1986; Barnes 1986; Wipff 1996.

1. Sessile spikelets 7–11 mm long; terminal inflorescence conspicuously exserted beyond bracts,
  not woolly in appearance; pedicelled spikelets large, well-developed, similar to sessile except
  awnless                                                                                                   A. gerardii
1. Sessile spikelets 7 mm or less long; inflorescences either not conspicuously exserted beyond
  bracts OR if exserted then appearing woolly; pedicelled spikelets rudimentary, vestigial, or ab-
  sent (= pedicel only).
  2. Each inflorescence with 2 relatively stiff and usually straight branches, the spikelets and hairs
    usually so dense that the branch axes are not easily visible; inflorescences often conspicu-
    ously exserted beyond bracts; sessile spikelets 5–7 mm long                                            A. ternarius
  2. Each inflorescence with 2–5 slender, delicate and flexuous branches, the spikelets and hairs
    often not as dense, the branch axes thus often visible, sometimes easily so; sessile spikelets 5
    mm long or less; inflorescences not conspicuously exserted OR exerted in A. gyrans.
    3. Upper sheathing bracts of inflorescence inflated-spathe-like; inflorescences usually exerted
       beyond the bracts; sessile spikelets 4–5 mm long; culms with tufts of long hairs just below
       sheathing bracts of inflorescence; rare in nc TX, known only from Tarrant Co.                         A. gyrans
    3. Upper sheathing bracts of inflorescence not inflated; inflorescences not conspicuously ex-
       erted; sessile spikelets 4 mm or less long; culms glabrous OR with tufts of long hairs just
       below sheathing bracts of inflorescence; extremely widespread and abundant in nc TX.
       4. Inflorescences crowded apically, broad, broom-like; culms with tuft of long hairs below
         sheathing bracts of inflorescence                                                               A. glomeratus
       4. Inflorescences numerous but not clustered apically; culms glabrous below sheathing
         bracts of inflorescence                                                                          A. virginicus

Andropogon gerardii Vitman, (for Loius Gérard, 1733–1819, French botanist). Plant to 2 m tall,
essentially glabrous, often glaucous; inflorescences of 2–7 branches, digitate; racemes 4–11 cm
long; sessile spikelets usually scabrous, often glaucous; upper lemma of sessile spikelet awned
or awnless (sometimes in subsp. hallii); pedicellate spikelets about as large as sessile one, awnless.
Aug–Nov. The following key to subspecies is modified from Sutherland (1986) and Wipff (1996).

1. Upper lemma of sessile spikelet awned with an awn (7.5–)10.0–25.0 mm long; rhizomes short or
   absent, the internodes usually 2 mm or less in length; anthers usually < 3.8 mm long; ligules
   0.4–2.5 mm long                                                                                subsp. gerardii
1. Upper lemma of sessile spikelet awnless or with an awn to 8(–11) mm long; rhizomes well-devel-
   oped, creeping, the internodes often exceeding 20 mm in length; anthers usually > 3.8 mm long;
   ligules (0.9)3–4.5 mm long                                                                        subsp. hallii

subsp. gerardii, BIG BLUESTEM, TURKEYFOOT. In relatively undisturbed areas; throughout TX. One
                                                                          ARISTIDA/POACEAE 1239

of “big four” tall grasses of the original native prairie along with Panicum virgatum,
Schizachyrium scoparium, and Sorghastrum nutans. m/78

subsp. hallii (Hack.) Wipff, (presumably named for E.A. Hall who collected the type in Ne-
braska in 1862), SAND BLUESTEM. Sandy soils; a Montague Co. collection is apparently this sub-
species, which is generally found to the w of nc TX; Rolling Plains, High Plains, and Trans-
Pecos. [A. gerardii var. paucipilus (Nash) Fernald, A. hallii Hack., A. paucipilus Nash] The 2
subspecies sometimes hybridize (Barnes 1986) with the hybrids named A. gerardii subsp.
⫻chrysocomus (Nash) Wipff (Wipff 1996).

Andropogon glomeratus (Walter) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (clustered), BUSHY BLUESTEM,
BUSHY BEARD GRASS. Plant 0.75–1.5 m tall; inflorescences much-branched, crowded, broom-like;
inflorescence branches 1.5–3 cm long; sheaths of terminal branchlets of inflorescences narrow,
reddish brown; sessile spikelets 3–4.5 mm long; glumes glabrous; pedicellate spikelets rudimen-
tary or absent. Roadsides, low moist areas; throughout TX. Sep–Nov.

Andropogon gyrans Ashe, (going around in circles, concentrically twisted and plaited backward
and forward; the significance of the name unclear, not given in the type description), ELLIOTT’S
BLUESTEM, ELLIOTT’S BLUE GRASS. Plant 0.3–0.80 m tall; inflorescences not broom-like; inflores-
cence branches 3–4(–5) cm long; upper sheathing bracts of inflorescence inflated-spathe-like,
to 6–10 mm broad, 7–15+ cm long; awns of sessile spikelets 10–15 mm long; pedicellate spikelets
rudimentary or nearly so. Usually in partial shade; Tarrant Co. (Campbell 1983); mainly se and
e TX. [A. elliottii of authors, not Chapman] This species has long incorrectly gone under the
name A. elliottii (Campbell 1983).

Andropogon ternarius Michx., (in threes), SPLIT-BEARD BLUESTEM, SPLIT-BEARD BEARD GRASS,
FEATHER BLUESTEM, SILVERY BEARD GRASS. Plant 0.7–1.2 m tall; culms glabrous or with a tuft of
long hairs below bract bearing node; inflorescences on lateral shoots at all upper nodes; inflo-
rescence branches 3–6 cm long; sessile spikelets glabrous, awned; pedicellate spikelets slender,
awnless, rudimentary, 2 mm or less long, not wider than pedicel. Sandy soils, woodland or
woodland pastures; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers. Sep–Nov.

Andropogon virginicus L., (of Virginia), BROOMSEDGE BLUESTEM, BROOMSEDGE, VIRGINIA
BLUESTEM, YELLOWSEDGE BLUESTEM. Plant 0.50–1 m tall; culm nodes glabrous; inflorescences
branched, not densely clustered; inflorescence branches 2–3 cm long; sheathing bracts of inflo-
rescence usually straw-colored; sessile spikelets with awned lemma; pedicellate spikelets rudi-
mentary or absent. Sandy soils; moist areas or slopes; Grayson, Hopkins, Kaufman, Lamar, and
Limestone cos.; widespread in e 1/2 of TX. Sep–Nov. This species was inadvertently introduced
to the Hawaiian Islands in 1932 and is there considered one of the most threatening alien spe-
cies; it is a serious invader of native communities and alters the fire and hydrology regimes
(Cronk & Fuller 1995).

                                 ARISTIDA THREEAWN
Annuals or perennials; panicles open or contracted; spikelets 1-flowered, usually relatively
large (long); glumes 1(–3)-nerved; lemmas hardened, terete, linear, with a sharp-pointed callus
at base, with 3 awns; awn column present or absent; caryopsis permanently enclosed within
the lemma.
AA genus of ca. 230 species of warm areas of the world. The sharp calluses can be problematic
for livestock and irritating when in shoes and socks. (Latin: arista, a beard or awn) (subfamily
Aristidoideae, tribe Aristideae)
REFERENCES: Hitchcock 1924; Holmgren & Holmgren 1977; Allred 1984a, 1984b, 1985a, 1985b,
1986; Sutherland 1986.
1240 POACEAE/ARISTIDA

1. Lateral awns of lemma much reduced, 1–2 mm long, erect; central awn of lemma 3–8
   mm long, deflexed, with a spiral coil at base like a corkscrew                                           A. dichotoma
1. Lateral awns of lemma usually well-developed, (2–)4 mm or more long (often much longer),
   erect to spreading, horizontal, or even deflexed; central awn of lemma (5–)10–36 mm long, de-
   flexed to erect, without a spiral coil at base OR in 1 rare species (A. basiramea) with a spiral coil at
   base.
   2. Awns of lemma, at least central one, spirally coiled at base like a corkscrew OR with a distinct
      semicircular bend at base.
      3. Lemmas 7–10 mm long (to base of awn); awn column with a well-defined joint at base,
         separating at the joint at maturity (check mature spikelets); central awn of lemma with
         a semicircular bend at base                                                                        A. desmantha
      3. Lemmas 4–7 mm long; awn column not jointed basally and not separating at maturity;
         central awn of lemma spirally coiled at base like a corkscrew                                       A. basiramea
  2. Awns of lemma nearly straight or curved, but neither spirally coiled basally nor with a distinct
     semicircular bend.
     4. Lemmas 16–28 mm long to base of awn                                                               A. oligantha
     4. Lemmas 15 mm or less long to base of awn.
        5. Leaf sheaths (at least lower ones) lanate pubescent, the hairs cobwebby, kinked, and
           intertwined                                                                                       A. lanosa
       5. Leaf sheaths not lanate pubescent, varying from glabrous to pilose, the hairs if peresent
          ± straight, not cobbwebby, and usually appressed.
          6. Panicles open, at least lower branches spreading.
             7. Awns of lemma 4–10 cm long; second glume usually 14–25 mm long; lemmas 12–
                16 mm long (to base of awns)                                               A. purpurea var. longiseta
             7. Awns of lemma 3–4.5 cm long; second glume usually 15 mm or less long; lemmas
                usually 10–12 mm long                                                      A. purpurea var. purpurea
          6. Panicles contracted, the branches usually all stiffly appressed along the main
             axis.
             8. Lemmas narrowing into a slender twisted awn column (sometimes called a beak)
                1–4 mm long                                                                 A. purpurea var. nealleyi
             8. Lemmas thick to base of awns; awn column absent.
                9. Awns 4–10 cm long                                                       A. purpurea var. longiseta
                9. Awns 3.5 cm or less long.
                   10. Plants annual; glumes about equal; central awns 5–30 mm or more long; lem-
                       mas (3–)4–9 mm long; lateral awns sometimes reduced and 1/2 or less the
                       length of the central awn OR well-developed                                     A. longespica
                   10. Plants perennial; glumes about equal OR first glume half to three-fourths as
                       long as second; central awns 15–30 mm long; lemmas 4–15 mm long; lateral
                       awns well-developed, at least 1/2 the length of the central awn.
                       11. First (= lower) glume ± as long as to slightly longer than the mostly 5–10
                           mm long second glume; lemma 4–8 mm long                                  A. purpurascens
                       11. First glume 1/2–3/4 as long as the 11–15 mm long second glume; lemma
                           ca. 11–15 mm long                                                A. purpurea var. wrightii

Aristida basiramea Engelm. ex Vasey, (branching from base), FORK-TIP THREEAWN. Annual;
panicles contracted; glumes about equal, up to 10 mm long including awn; lemmas 4–7 mm
long, central awn 9–15 mm long, conspicuously spirally coiled. Sandy soils; Dallas Co.; known
only from Bastrop, Dallas, and Red River cos. in TX (Gould 1975b). Aug–Oct. According to
Allred (1986) this species is similar to A. dichotoma and could be treated as a variety of that spe-
cies. The 2 are distinguished by A. basiramea having spreading lateral awns usually 4–10 mm
long (vs. erect, 1–2 mm long in A. dichotoma)
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1241




   Andropogon ternarius [HI1]                    Andropogon virginicus [REE]                   Aristida basiramea [USB]




     Aristida desmantha [USB]                     Aristida dichotoma [USB]                        Aristida lanosa [USB]




Aristida longespica var. geniculata [GO1]   Aristida longespica var. longespica [HI1]             Aristida oligantha [USB]
1242 POACEAE/ARISTIDA

Aristida desmantha Trin. & Rupr., (with clustered flowers), CURLY THREEAWN, WESTERN
TRIPLEAWN, WESTERN THREEAWN. Annual; leaf sheaths glabrous to lanate pubescent; panicles
loosely contracted, 8–20 cm long; spikelets light yellowish or golden-brown; glumes 1-nerved,
awn-tipped, about equal; lemmas 7–10 mm long, the awns about equal, spreading; awn column
jointed basally, well-defined. Sandy soils; Dallas (Reverchon, 1876; Stillwell, 1935), Limestone,
Palo Pinto, and Parker cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX. Sep–Nov.

Aristida dichotoma Michx., (2-parted or forked), CHURCH-MOUSE THREEAWN, POVERTY GRASS.
Annual; panicles contracted or racemes spike-like; glumes about equal; lemmas 4–6 mm long;
central awn 3–8 mm long, spirally coiled basally; lateral awns 1–2 mm long, erect. Sandy soils;
Dallas, Grayson, and Lamar cos.; e TX w to Blackland Prairie. Aug–Nov.

Aristida lanosa Muhl. ex Elliott, (woolly), WOOLLY-SHEATH THREEAWN, WOOLLY TRIPLEAWN
GRASS , WOOLLY THREEAWN. Perennial; panicles with appressed or somewhat spreading
branches; glumes subequal, 9–15 mm long including the awn when present; lemmas 8–9 mm
long, without a well-defined awn column; lemma awns only curved below. Similar in appear-
ance to A. desmantha which also has leaf sheaths with lanate pubescence. However, A.
desmantha has lemma awns with a semicircular bend and a distinct awn column well-defined
from the lemma. Woods openings, often in sandy soils; Lamar and Montague cos.; mainly e and
se TX. Late Aug–Nov.

Aristida longespica Poir., (long-spiked), SLIM-SPIKE THREEAWN. Annual; leaves not in a conspicu-
ous basal tuft; panicles contracted, narrow and spike-like; glumes about equal, (3–)4–9 mm
long; central awn erect to reflexed. Two varieties, not always easily distinguished, occur in nc
TX; Allred (1986) noted that intermediates between the 2 are not uncommon; however, he fur-
ther indicated that since the extremes are so strikingly different, distinction at the varietal level
seems appropriate. Sandy open areas. Late Aug–Dec.

1. Lemmas usually (3.5–)7–10 mm long; central awn usually (8–)12–36 mm long; lateral awns
    usually 2/3–3/4 as long as central, usually 6–18 mm long                               var. geniculata
1. Lemmas usually 2.5–7 mm long; central awn usually 5–10(–15) mm long; lateral awns much
   shorter, usually 1/3–slightly more than 1/2 as long as central, usually 2–5(–8) mm long var. longespica

var. geniculata (Raf.) Fernald, (jointed), KEARNEY’S THREEAWN, PLAINS THREEAWN. Montague,
Parker, and Tarrant cos.; widespread in e 1/2 of TX. Aug–Dec. [A. intermedia Scribn. & C.R. Ball]

var. longespica. SLIM-SPIKE THREEAWN, SLENDER THREEAWN. Bell, Bosque, Dallas, Grayson, and
Parker cos.; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers.

Aristida oligantha Michx., (few-flowered), OLDFIELD THREEAWN, PRAIRIE THREEAWN, FEW-
FLOWER ARISTIDA. Annual; panicles open, much branched; glumes subequal, 18–25 mm long,
the second awned, the awn up to 1 cm long; lemmas 16–28 mm long, the awns about equal, 3–7
cm long. Calcareous soils; throughout TX. Jun–Nov. This species apparently has allelopathic ef-
fects on other plants; it is also often seen growing on seed harvester ant mounds (J. Stanford,
pers. comm.).

Aristida purpurascens Poir., (purplish), ARROW-FEATHER THREEAWN, BROOMSEDGE, ARROW GRASS.
Tufted perennial; basal leaves persistent after drying, curly; panicles narrow, contracted; lem-
mas 4–8 mm long, purple or mottled with purple at maturity; central awns 15–30 mm long.
Similar to A. longespica except A. purpurascens is perennial. Woods openings, borders, and
prairies, usually on sandy soils; Dallas, Fannin, Grayson, and Hunt cos.; se and e TX w to Black-
land Prairie, also Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov.

Aristida purpurea Nutt., (purple). Perennial; panicles open or contracted. A highly variable spe-
cies with 4 varieties in nc TX that have in the past been treated as separate species. Because of
                                                                             ARUNDINARIA/POACEAE 1243

extensive intergradation, we are following most recent authors (e.g., Holmgren & Holmgren
1977, Allred 1984b, Sutherland 1986, Kartesz 1994) in treating them as varieties of A. purpurea.
Most plants may be separated by the characters given in the key to species and varieties.

var. longiseta (Steud.) Vasey, (long-bristled), RED THREEAWN, DOGTOWN GRASS, LONG-AWNED
ARISTIDA, LONG-AWNED THREEAWN. Panicles contracted or open; glumes unequal, the first 0.5–
0.6 as long as second, the second 14–25 mm long; lemmas 12–16 mm long, the awns about equal,
4–10 cm long. Disturbed sites; mainly Blackland Prairie s and w to w TX. Mar–Dec. [A. longiseta
Steud., A. reverchonii Vasey]

var. nealleyi (Vasey) Allred, (for Greenleaf Alley Nealley, 1864–1896, botanist), BLUE THREEAWN.
Panicles contracted; glumes unequal, the first glume about half as long as second; lemmas
slightly longer than second glume; apex of lemma twisted into awn column 1–4 mm long;
awns slightly unequal, 15–20(–30) mm long. Rocky, usually limestone soils; Coleman and
Somervell cos., also Hood Co. (Mahler 1988); w part of nc TX s and w to w TX. May–Oct. [A.
glauca (Nees) Walp.]

var. purpurea, (purple), PURPLE THREEAWN, PURPLE NEEDLE GRASS. Panicles open, curving, the
branches flexuous; glumes unequal, the second 11–15 mm long, up to twice the length of the
first; lemmas 10–12 mm long, the awns about equal, 3.5–4.5 cm long. Sandy or rocky soils; Post
Oak Savannah s and w to w TX. Apr–Oct.

var. wrightii (Nash) Allred, (for Charles Wright, 1811–1885, TX collector), WRIGHT’S THREEAWN,
WRIGHT’S TRIPLEAWN GRASS. Panicles contracted; glumes unequal, the second 11–15 mm long, the
first 0.5–0.75 as long as second; lemmas equaling or exceeding second glume, the awns about
equal, 15–30 mm long, the central occasionally longer than laterals. Calcareous soils; Blackland
Prairie s and w to w TX. May–Oct. [A. wrightii Nash]

                                          ARUNDINARIA
AA genus of ca. 50 species of bamboos native to China, Japan, and the Americas. (Latin:
arundo, a reed) (subfamily Bambusoideae, tribe Bambuseae)
REFERENCE: Platt & Brantley 1997.

Arundinaria gigantea (Walter) Muhl., (gigantic), GIANT CANE, SOUTHERN CANE, SWITCH CANE.
Much branched woody perennial 2–5(–8) m tall from rhizome; leaves variable, the lower often
reduced; upper leaf blades usually 15–25 cm long, 2–4(–5.5) cm wide; ligule a firm membrane
1.5 mm or less long; inflorescences racemose or narrowly paniculate; spikelets 1–few, large, 4–
7(–8) cm long, ca. 8 mm broad, with 6–12(–13) flowers; lemmas (10–)15–25 mm long. Moist
woods or low areas; can form dense stands known as canebrakes; much reduced with the intro-
duction of domestic livestock; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage, also Henderson Co. on e margin
of nc TX; mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos. Mostly Apr–May. This is
the only native bamboo species in TX.

                                              ARUNDO
AA genus of 3 species native to the Mediterranean and Taiwan. (Latin: arundo, a reed) (sub-
family Panicoideae, tribe Arundineae)

Arundo donax L., (classical name), GIANT REED. Perennial, rhizomatous; extremely large, the
culms 2–6 m tall, usually unbranched; leaf blades usually 4–7 cm wide on main culms;
panicles 30–60 cm long; branchlets and rachilla joints essentially glabrous; spikelets usually
with 2–4 florets; glumes glabrous; lemmas densely hairy. Wet areas of ponds and roadsides;
usually tight, clay soils; cultivated along highways; apparently not setting fertile seed, spreads vegeta-
1244 POACEAE/AVENA

tively; nearly throughout TX. Mostly Sep–Nov. Native to Mediterranean region. This is the “reed”
of the Bible and has been used for 5,000 years for pipe instruments (Mabberley 1987). I

                                             AVENA OATS
Erect annuals 30–120 cm tall; ligule a whitish membrane 2–4 mm long; inflorescence an open
panicle of ca. 8–30 large pendulous spikelets; spikelets 2–4-flowered; glumes ca. 17–30 mm
long, longer than the lemmas, acute to acuminate; lemmas awned from near middle of the back
or awnless.
AA mainly temperate Old World genus of ca. 25 species ranging from Europe to the Mediter-
ranean region and Ethiopia. (Classical Latin name for oats) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)
REFERENCES: Baum 1968, 1977, 1991; Zohary & Hopf 1994.

1. Awn of lemmas geniculate, mostly 2.5–4 cm long; lemmas with stiff, usually reddish brown
   hairs on dorsal surface; spikelets usually 3–4-flowered                                       A. fatua
1. Awn of lemmas not geniculate, irregularly developed, to < 3 cm long or absent; lemmas gla-
   brous; spikelets usually 2-flowered                                                          A. sativa

Avena fatua L., (simple), WILD OATS. Roadsides and other disturbed areas; Tarrant Co.; scattered
in TX. Mostly Apr–May. Native to the Mediterranean area. The pointed callus of the fruit is re-
ported to cause mechanical injuries (Burlage 1968). I

Avena sativa L., (cultivated), COMMON OATS, CULTIVATED OATS. Commonly cultivated for grain,
often planted to prevent washing on newly graded roadsides, also naturalized and common as
a weed on roadsides and other disturbed areas; throughout TX. Mostly Mar–Jun. Native of the
Mediterranean area where it has long been a cultivated cereal crop. [A. fatua L. var. sativa (L.)
Hausskn.] While OATS is thought to be a later domesticate than WHEAT, it is one of the most nu-
tritious of the cereals, having a high protein content; this hexaploid species probably evolved
from weeds invading the fields of early WHEAT and BARLEY farmers (Heiser 1990a; Zohary &
Hopf 1994). It is possibly best treated as a variety (e.g., Jones et al. 1997) or subspecies of A. fatua,
which is apparently involved in its ancestry (Zohary & Hopf 1994). High nitrate concentra-
tions and fungal contaminants can result in the loss of cattle and horses upon ingesting OAT
hay (Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977).  I

                                  AXONOPUS CARPET GRASS
AA genus of 35 species of tropical and warm areas of the Americas and Africa. (Greek: axon,
axis, and pous, foot) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Chase 1938; Black 1963; Crins 1991.

Axonopus fissifolius (Raddi) Kuhlm., (split-leaved), COMMON CARPET GRASS. Perennial, cespitose,
stoloniferous, forming carpets but the flower-bearing culms erect; culms 20–75 cm long; leaves
essentially glabrous; leaf blades 6–17(–28) cm long, 1.5–7(–9) cm wide, flat, blunt; ligule a mem-
brane ca. 0.3 mm long; inflorescences of 2–4 slender branches, the upper 2 usually paired and
spreading at culm tip, the branches ca. 2.5–8(–10) cm long, ca. 1 mm wide, slightly winged;
spikelets awnless, 2-flowered, the lower floret staminate or neuter, the upper floret perfect, 1.8–
2.2(–2.6) mm long; first glume absent; perfect lemma hardened, glabrous, with inrolled margins,
with rounded back facing away from axis. Moist sandy woods, margins of wet areas, roadsides;
Henderson, Limestone, and Milam cos., near extreme e margin of nc TX; mostly se and e TX.
(Feb) May–Nov(–Dec). [A. affinis Chase]

                       BOTHRIOCHLOA BLUESTEM, BEARD GRASS
Annuals or perennials; ligules membranous; inflorescences paniculate with racemose
                                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1245




         Aristida purpurascens [HI1]                  Aristida purpurea var. longiseta [GO1]         Aristida purpurea var. nealleyi [GO1]




Aristida purpurea var. purpurea [GO1]                 Aristida purpurea var. wrightii [HI1]                Arundinaria gigantea [SCB]




                                       Arundo donax [LYN]                                                    Avena fatua [HI1]
1246 POACEAE/BOTHRIOCHLOA

branches; spikelets in pairs, one sessile, one pedicelled; pedicels and upper internodes of inflo-
rescence branches with a central groove or broad membranous area; disarticulation at base of
sessile spikelet so that associated pedicel and section of inflorescence branch fall with the
sessile spikelet; sessile spikelets perfect, 2-flowered, the lower floret sterile, the upper floret fer-
tile; first glume dorsally flattened, not enclosing the second glume; second glume with a
rounded median keel; lemma of upper floret usually awned; pedicellate spikelets well-devel-
oped, but often much smaller and narrower than sessile spikelets, neuter or staminate, awnless.
AA genus of ca. 35 species of warm areas of the world; a number are cultivated for fodder; for-
merly treated in a more inclusive Andropogon. (Greek: bothrion, a shallow pit, and chloa, grass,
from pitted glumes of some species) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Gould 1953, 1957a, 1959b, 1967; Shinners 1956e; Celarier & Harlan 1958; Allred 1981;
Allred & Gould 1983.

1. Inflorescences purplish, open, with 2–8 branches; inflorescence axis shorter than branches, the
   inflorescence appearing nearly digitate; pedicelled spikelets about as large and broad as sessile
   spikelets                                                                                         B. ischaemum
1. Inflorescences whitish silvery, contracted, with panicle branches often numerous; inflorescence
   axis usually longer than branches, the inflorescence not appearing digitate; pedicelled spikelets
   conspicuously smaller and narrower than sessile spikelets.
   2. Sessile spikelets 4.5–7.3 mm long; awn of lemma 20–30 mm or more long; first glume of sessile
      spikelet with or without a glandular pit; culm nodes with a conspicuous ring of short,
      spreading, white hairs                                                                         B. barbinodis
  2. Sessile spikelets < 4.5 mm long; awn of lemma 18 mm or less long; first glume of sessile spike-
     let without a glandular pit; culm nodes without a conspicuous ring of short, spreading,
     white hairs                                                                                     B. laguroides

Bothriochloa barbinodis (Lag.) Herter, (bearded at nodes). Panicles included to long exserted;
lemma awn of sessile spikelet geniculate. Sandy or rocky limestone soils. Mostly May–Oct.

1. First glume of most sessile spikelets without a glandular pit or depression                        var. barbinoidis
1. First glume of most sessile spikelets with a glandular pit or depression (like a conspicuous “pin-
   hole” in the surface of the glume)                                                                   var. perforata

var. barbinodis, CANE BLUESTEM, CANE BEARD GRASS, BRISTLE-JOINT BLUESTEM. Bosque, Brown,
Hamilton, Palo Pinto, and Young cos.; Grand Prairie s and w to w TX.

var. perforata (Trin. ex E. Fourn.) Gould, (perforated), PINHOLE BLUESTEM, PINHOLE BEARD GRASS,
PERFORATED BLUESTEM. Bosque, Palo Pinto, and Tarrant cos.; w part of nc TX s and w to w TX.

Bothriochloa ischaemum (L.) Keng var. songarica (Rupr. ex Fisch. & C.A. Mey.) Celerier &
Harlan, (sp.: from Greek: ischaemos, blood-restraining, from supposed styptic properties; var.: of
Dzungaria, central Asia), KING RANCH BLUESTEM, KR BLUESTEM. Plant becoming rhizomatous or
stoloniferous with mowing or grazing; lemma awn of sessile spikelet geniculate, 1–1.5 mm long.
Calcareous soils, roadsides, fields; throughout TX. Mostly May–Nov. Native of c and e Asia. A
pernicious weed crowding out native species. I

Bothriochloa laguroides (DC.) Herter. subsp. torreyana (Steud.) Allred & Gould., (sp.: like
Lagurus—hare’s-tail grass; subsp.: for John Torrey, 1796–1873, botanist and physician, co-author
with Asa Gray, described many w American plants), SILVER BLUESTEM, SILVER BEARD-GRASS.
Plant 50–130 cm tall; panicles usually exerted. Dry, often sandy soils, increases under distur-
bance, extremely common along roadsides; throughout TX, more commonly Blackland Prairie
and w. Mostly May–Nov. [Bothriochloa longipaniculata (Gould) Allred & Gould, B. saccharoides
(Sw.) Rydb. var. longipaniculata (Gould) Gould, B. saccharoides (Sw.) Rydb. var. torreyana
                                                                                          BOUTELOUA/POACEAE 1247

(Steud.) Gould] While this taxon has been variously treated in the past (e.g., Gould 1975b;
Kartesz 1994), we are following Jones et al. (1997) and S. Hatch (pers. comm.) in recognizing it as
B. laguroides subsp. torreyana.

                                     BOUTELOUA GRAMA GRASS
Perennials or annual (B. barbata); culms erect, tufted; rhizomes present or absent; leaves mostly
basal; leaf blades usually flat, involute apically; inflorescences of 1–many short, spike-like
branches; spikelets sessile, with 1 perfect floret and 1 or more staminate or neuter florets above;
glumes 1-nerved; lemmas 3-nerved.
AAn American genus of 24 species ranging from Canada to Argentina, especially in Mexico.
It includes a number of valuable native forage grasses; some are also used as ornamentals. All
species are C4 plants with typical Kranz leaf anatomy (Gould 1979); these adaptations allow
more effective capture of carbon dioxide and thus less water loss through transpiraton (since
stomata do not have to be as open for gas exchange), an advantage in arid environments.
(Named for Claudio Boutelou, 1774–1842, a Spanish writer on floriculture and agriculture)
(subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCES: Griffiths 1912; Featherly 1931; Gould & Kapadia 1962, 1964; Kapadia & Gould
1964a, 1964b; Roy & Gould 1971; Gould 1979; Wipff & Jones 1996.

1. Spikelets usually 3–7 per inflorescence branch, not pectinately arranged on inflorescence
   branches; inflorescence branches ca. 1.5 cm or less long, falling entire (section Bouteloua).
   2. Inflorescence branches 25 to numerous per inflorescence                                          B. curtipendula
   2. Inflorescence branches 10 or less per inflorescence                                                  B. rigidiseta
1. Spikelets usually 8–90 per inflorescence branch, with a striking pectinate (= comb-like) arrange-
   ment on inflorescence branches; inflorescence branches 1–5 cm long, not falling entire, the flo-
   rets separating from persistent glumes (section Chondrosioides).
   3. Plants tufted annuals; inflorescence branches 1–3 cm long (usually averaging ca. 2 cm),
      usually < 3 mm wide including awns                                                                     B. barbata
   3. Plants perennials; inflorescence branches 1.5–5 cm long (typically > 3 cm except in B. trifida),
      usually 3 mm or more wide including awns.
      4. Inflorescence branches ending with a naked extension of branch axis or axis-like rudimen-
         tary spikelet extended well beyond the terminal normal spikelet, the inflorescence branches
         thus with conspicuous, elongated, sharp points (these definitely different from awns).
         5. Tuft of hairs absent at base of the lowermost rudimentary floret of each spikelet;
            culms 15–40 cm tall, decumbent at base, usually branched, with 4–6 nodes; anthers 2–
            2.5 mm long; inflorescences 10–30 cm long (above uppermost leaf ); inflorescence
            branches ending with a naked extension of branch axis extended well beyond the ter-
            minal normal spikelet                                                                             B. hirsuta
         5. Tuft of hairs present at base of the lowermost rudimentary floret of each spikelet; culms
            35–75 cm tall, strictly erect, unbranched, usually with three nodes; anthers ca. 3 mm long;
            inflorescences 25–40 cm long (above uppermost leaf ); inflorescence branches ending
            with axis-like rudimentary spikelet extending beyond normal spikelets                          B. pectinata
      4. Inflorescence branches ending in a spikelet (this spikelet can be reduced and pointed),
         without conspicuous, long, sharp points (awns often the terminal most part of the inflo-
         rescence branches).
         6. Inflorescence branches usually 1–3 per main inflorescence axis, spreading, 1.5–6 cm long
            (at least some usually > 3 cm long)                                                               B. gracilis
         6. Inflorescence branches 3–8 per main inflorescence axis, usually appressed to axis, < 2(–
            2.5) cm long                                                                                       B. trifida
1248 POACEAE/BOUTELOUA

Bouteloua barbata Lag., (barbed), SIXWEEKS GRAMA. Culms to 30 cm; inflorescence branches
usually 4–6 per main axis; axis of inflorescence branches not extended beyond spikelets. Dry
grasslands, roadsides, and wasteplaces, typically sandy soils; city weed in Tarrant Co.; mainly
Rolling Plains s and w to w TX. Apr–Nov.

Bouteloua curtipendula (Michx.) Torr., (short-hanging), SIDE-OATS GRAMA. State grass of Texas.
Rhizomatous; inflorescence branches usually 25–80, about 1.5 cm long, along 1 elongate main
axis terminating a leafy culm; fertile lemma awnless. Jun–Nov. This species is extremely vari-
able morphologically, ecologically, and in terms of chromosome number; it often reproduces
apomictically (Gould 1959a). It was adopted as the state grass by the 62nd Texas Legislature in
1971 (Jones et al. 1997).

1. Plants without creeping rhizomes (base can sometimes be knotty); culms in large or small clumps,
   stiffly erect                                                                                    var. caespitosa
1. Plants with creeping rhizomes; culms not in large clumps, decumbent or stiffly erect         var. curtipendula

var. caespitosa Gould & Kapadia, (tufted). Mostly on loose, limey soils; Erath, Palo Pinto, and
Tarrant cos.; w part of nc TX s and w to w TX.

var. curtipendula. On better soils and little disturbed areas including native prairies; throughout
TX. This is the predominant variety throughout nc TX.

Bouteloua gracilis (Willd. ex Kunth) Lag. ex Griffiths, (graceful), BLUE GRAMA. Inflorescence
branches 1–3(–4) per main axis, up to 5 cm long, curved; axis of inflorescence branches not ex-
tending beyond spikelets; apical rudimentary spikelets absent. Grasslands; Archer and Jack
cos.; West Cross Timbers s and w to w TX. Jul–Oct.

Bouteloua hirsuta Lag., (hairy), HAIRY GRAMA. Inflorescence branches 1–4 per main axis, usually
2.3–4 cm long (including branch axis tip), straight to curved; axis of inflorescence branches
continuous and extending beyond spikelets, usually scabrous; chromosome number quite vari-
able, 2n = 20–60 (Roy 1968). Grasslands and a variety of other habitats; throughout TX. Jun–Nov.

Bouteloua pectinata Feath., (comb-like), TALL GRAMA. Inflorescence branches usually 3–5 per
main axis, 2.5–4.5 cm long, straight to slightly curved; axis of inflorescence branches not ex-
tended but with axis-like rudimentary spikelet extending beyond spikelets; axis-like rudimen-
tary spikelet usually hairy at base, its apex usually visibly bifid under maginification; 2n = 20.
Limestone outcrops, hilltops, well-drained calcareous soils; Bell, Brown, Burnet, Coryell,
Grayson, Hood, Johnson, Parker, Somervell, and Williamson cos., also Bosque, Erath, Hamilton,
Lampasas, Wise (Roy 1968), and Tarrant (Featherly 1931) cos.; nc TX and Edwards Plateau; en-
demic to TX and OK. Mostly Jul–Aug, with a much shorter flowering period than B. hirsuta. [B.
hirsuta var. pectinata (Feath.) Cory, B. hirsuta subsp. pectinata (Feath.) Wipff & S.D. Jones]
While Wipff and Jones (1996) and Jones et al. (1997) recognized this taxon at the subspecific
level, we are following Roy and Gould (1971), whose biosystematic investigation supported its
recognition as a separate species. Even though hybridization can occur where the two grow to-
gether, they differ in numerous morphological characters and are usually easily distinguished
in the field. According to Gould (1979), “… the morphological uniformity of this species con-
trasts strikingly with the variability observed in populations of plants of B. hirsuta.” m/81

Bouteloua rigidiseta (Steud.) Hitchc., (stiff-awned), TEXAS GRAMA, MESQUITE GRASS. Inflores-
cence branches 6–8(–10), about 1 cm long, along 1 main axis terminating a leafy culm; fertile
lemma 3-awned; single rudimentary floret usually reduced to an awn column, 3-awned. Grass-
lands; nearly throughout TX. Mar–Oct.

Bouteloua trifida Thurb., (three-parted), RED GRAMA, THREEAWN GRAMA. Inflorescence branches
3–7 per main axis, up to 2(–2.5) cm long, slender and appressed to main axis; axis of inflores-
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1249




    Avena sativa [NVE]               Axonopus fissifolius [GO1]             Bothriochloa barbinodis var. barbinodis [HI1]




Bothriochloa barbinodis            Bothriochloa ischaemum                           Bothriochloa laguroides
   var. perforata [HI1]               var. songarica [GO1]                          subsp. torreyana [GO1, HEA]




 Bouteloua barbata [GO3]   Bouteloua curtipendula var. curtipendula [USB]              Bouteloua gracilis [GO3]
1250 POACEAE/BRACHYPODIUM

cence branches not extending beyond spikelets; apical rudimentary spikelet absent. Grass-
lands; Bell Co., also Brown, Comanche, and Hamilton cos. (HPC); throughout much of TX ex-
cept Blackland Prairie and far e TX. Apr–Nov.

                                BRACHYPODIUM FALSE BROOM
AA genus of 17 species of temperate Eurasia, tropical America, and tropical mountains.
(Greek: brachy, short, and podos, foot, from the short thick spikelets in some species) (subfamily
Pooideae, tribe Brachypodieae)

Brachypodium distachyon (L.) P. Beauv., (two-spiked), PURPLE FALSE BROOM. Annual usually 20–
50 cm tall; ligules 1–2 mm long, erose apically; inflorescence a spike or spicate raceme with 1–5
large spikelets; spikelets 2–3.5 cm long, usually with 9–18 imbricated florets; lower glume 3- to
7-nerved; upper glume 7- to 9-nerved; lemmas 7-nerved, with 1–2 cm long awn from entire
apex; paleas pectinate-ciliate on nerves. Roadsides and disturbed sites; included based on cita-
tion of vegetational area 5 by Gould (1975b) and Hignight et al. (1988); also Edwards Plateau.
Spring. Native of Europe. I

                          BRIZA QUAKING GRASS, SHAKING GRASS
Annuals (our species) with open panicles of awnless spikelets on long pedicels; spikelets usu-
ally with 3–14(–20) florets, the florets crowded and widely spreading; lemmas usually broader
than long, rounded apically.
AA genus of 20 species of temperate Eurasia and South America including cultivated orna-
mentals. (Named from Greek word for a kind of grain) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)

1. Spikelets large, mostly 12–25 mm long; inflorescences usually with only 1–6(–12 or more)
   spikelets                                                                                  B. maxima
1. Spikelets small, 2–6 mm long; inflorescences with many spikelets                              B. minor

Briza maxima L., (largest), BIG QUAKING GRASS. Plant to ca. 60 cm tall, glabrous or leaf blades
minutely scabrous; ligule of uppermost leaf usually 10 mm or more long; spikelets 12–25 mm long,
8–12 mm wide, with 7–14(–20) florets, not markedly tapered, longer than wide, on long, slender,
drooping pedicels. Introduced as a garden ornamental; included based on citation for vegeta-
tional area 5 by Hignight et al. (1988); mainly se and e TX. Apr–May. Native of Europe. I

Briza minor L., (smaller), LITTLE QUAKING GRASS. Plant to ca. 50 cm tall, glabrous or nearly so;
ligules 5–10 mm long; spikelets ca. 2–6 mm wide, with 3–8 florets, markedly tapered toward
apex, often almost triangular in shape, about as wide as long, pendulous on long usually
kinked pedicels. Open areas in woods, fields, disturbed places, sandy areas; Grayson and Tarrant
cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly se and e TX. Mostly Apr–May. Native to Europe. Re-
ported to contain cyanide (Burlage 1968). I

                                 BROMUS BROME GRASS, CHESS
Plants annual or perennial; leaf sheaths closed except at summit; ligule a membrane, often
prominent; inflorescence a usually ± 1-sided (barely so in B. hordeaceus) panicle or infrequently
a raceme; spikelets pedicelled, with 4–numerous florets; lemmas 2-toothed at apex (incon-
spicuously in B. catharticus), usually awned, with awn arising between the teeth, or awnless.
AA genus of ca. 100 species of temperate regions and tropical mountains; some are used as or-
namentals and for forage. (An ancient Greek name for oats; from broma, food) (subfamily
Pooideae, tribe Bromeae)
REFERENCES: Wagnon 1952; Soderstrom & Beaman 1968.
                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1251




Bouteloua hirsuta [USB]           Bouteloua pectinata [BOT, HEA]                     Bouteloua rigidiseta [HI1]




     Bouteloua trifida [USB]   Brachypodium distachyon [GLE]                     Briza maxima [LAM]




         Briza minor [BB2]       Bromus catharticus [USB]                     Bromus hordeaceus [USB]
1252 POACEAE/BROMUS

1. Glumes and lemmas sharply keeled, the spikelets strongly flattened; lower lemmas 2.5–3.2 mm
   wide from keel to margin, awnless or with a short awn 1–3 mm long, with apical teeth 0.1–0.3
   mm long                                                                                          B. catharticus
1. Glumes and lemmas not sharply keeled, the spikelets not strongly flattened; lower lemmas 1.0–
   2.7 mm wide from keel to margin, with an awn 4–18 mm long, with apical teeth 0.2–5 mm long
   (sometimes appressed, inconspicuous).
   2. Apical teeth of lemmas 2–5 mm long, thin, whitish or transparent, lance-linear, acumi-
      nate; awn of lemmas 12–18 mm long                                                                B. tectorum
   2. Apical teeth of lemmas 0.2–2.5 mm long, papery, opaque, triangular or ovate, acute or obtuse;
      awn of lemmas 4–13 mm long.
      3. Lower glume usually 1-nerved; upper glume narrowly oblong-lanceolate, 0.8–1.3 mm wide
         from keel to margin, 6–12 mm long; plants perennial, typically found in woods               B. pubescens
      3. Lower glume 3- or 5-nerved; upper glume broadly lanceolate or oblong-elliptic, 1.2–2 mm
         wide from keel to margin, 4–8 mm long; plants annual, typically found in disturbed areas.
         4. Glumes pubescent                                                                        B. hordeaceus
       4. Glumes glabrous or slightly pubescent on nerves or near apex.
          5. Palea from 0.8 mm shorter than lemma to equaling or barely exceeding it; mature
             lemmas mostly 6–7.5 mm long, with margins inrolled; awns usually 4–9 mm long; basal
             leaf sheath glabrous or inconspicuously hirsute                                         B. secalinus
         5. Palea 1–2 mm shorter than lemma; mature lemmas mostly 7–9 mm long, with
            margins not inrolled; awns usually 8–13 mm long; basal sheaths often conspicuously
            (with a lens) shaggy-pilose                                                             B. japonicus

Bromus catharticus Vahl, (cathartic, purgative), RESCUE GRASS, RESCUE BROME, SCHRADER’S
GRASS. Winter annual, in green growth from late fall to summer, 10–70 cm tall when in flower;
leaf sheaths spreading-pilose; spikelets glabrous. Roadsides, disturbed sites, lawns; throughout
TX. Mar–May. Native of s South America. [B. willdenowii Kunth, B. unioloides Kunth, Festuca
unioloides Willd.] I

Bromus hordeaceus L., (like barley—Hordeum), SOFT CHESS. Annual 10–60 cm tall; lower leaf
sheaths densely pilose, the upper glabrous; lemmas densely pubescent. Found as a weed at
Denton Agricultural Experiment Station in May, 1947; Denton, Limestone, and McLennan cos.;
also e TX. Native of Europe. [B. mollis of authors, not L., B. molliformis J. Lloyd] I

Bromus japonicus Thunb. ex Murray, (Japanese), JAPANESE BROME, JAPANESE CHESS, SPREADING
BROME. Annual 20–80 cm tall; leaf sheaths densely soft-pubescent or occasionally the upper-
most glabrous; leaf blades densely pilose; panicles rather dense, with drooping branches; lem-
mas glabrous; awns either straight or bent out in age. Roadsides, yards, and disturbed sites;
nearly throughout TX. May–Jun. Native of Europe and Asia. I

Bromus pubescens Muhl. ex Willd., (downy). Perennial 70–120 cm tall, forming small clumps;
leaf sheaths spreading-pilose; spikelets drooping; lemmas usually densely pubescent. Woods
and thickets; Bosque, Dallas, Denton, Fannin, Grayson, McLennan, and Tarrant cos., also
Johnson Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. May. We are follow-
ing Gould (1975b) in lumping [B. nottowayanus Fernald]; the name has been applied to indi-
viduals with 5-nerved first glumes.

Bromus secalinus L., (like rye—Secale), RYE BROME. Annual, 20–100 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous
or (especially lower ones) densely pubescent; leaf blades usually ± pilose; panicles narrow,
slightly drooping; lemmas glabrous or inconspicuously pubescent. Roadsides, fields, and dis-
turbed sites; widespread in TX. Apr–Jun. Native of Europe. Similar to and possibly hybridizes
with B. japonicus. Texas plants of B. secalinus have been treated as B. racemosus by a number of
                                                                                         BUCHLOE/POACEAE 1253

authors. However, we are following Gould (1975b), Hatch et al. (1990), and Jones et al. (1997) in
placing them in B. secalinus. [B. racemosus of authors, not L.] I

Bromus tectorum L., (of houses), CHEAT GRASS BROME. Annual 10–80 cm tall; lower leaf sheaths
densely pubescent, the upper glabrous; panicle branches drooping. Roadsides, railroads, and
disturbed sites. Apr–May. Native of Europe; in TX since 1945 (Mahler 1988). The awns can cause
mechanical injury to grazing livestock (Burlage 1968). I

1. Lemmas glabrous or scabrous                                                                        var. glabratus
1. Lemmas soft pubescent                                                                              var. tectorum

var. glabratus Spenn., (rather smooth, without hairs), CHEAT GRASS. Included based on citation of
vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Gould (1975b) and Hatch et al. (1990); in TX cited only for vegeta-
tional area 4. Spring. I
var. tectorum. CHEAT GRASS, DOWNY BROME, DOWNY CHESS, BRONCO GRASS. Collin, Denton,
Grayson, Hill, McLennan, and Wise cos., nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr–May(–Jun). I

                                     BUCHLOE BUFFALO GRASS
AA monotypic North American genus. (Greek: bous, cow or ox, and chloë, grass) (subfamily
Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)

Buchloe dactyloides (Nutt.) Engelm., (finger-like), BUFFALO GRASS. Perennial; plants dioecious or
occasionally monoecious, stoloniferous forming sod; leaves usually with short, curly blades;
ligule a ciliate membrane ca. 0.5 mm long, not auricled; staminate inflorescences elevated
above the leaves, with 1–4 spike-like branches 6–14 mm long; staminate spikelets usually 6–12
per branch, sessile, pectinately arranged, 2-flowered; glumes unequal, 1(–2)-nerved; lemmas 3-
nerved; pistillate inflorescences bur-like, usually hidden in leafy portion of plant, closely sub-
tended by inflated leaf sheaths, with usually 3–5(–7) one-flowered spikelets, falling entire; in-
florescence axis indurate; second glumes indurate, yellowish with apex toothed, green; lemmas
3-nerved, 3-lobed. Grasslands; throughout TX. Apr–Sep. This species is dominant over large ar-
eas of the short grass prairie of the Great Plains; it was used by settlers in making sod houses; it
is currently increasing in use as a low maintenance, drought resistant yard grass.

                                CENCHRUS SANDBUR, GRASSBUR
Annuals or perennials, largely glabrous; leaf sheaths compressed and keeled; ligule of hairs; in-
florescence spike-like, with zigzag, triangular-flattened axis; spikelets of 2 florets, the lower
floret sterile with glume-like lemma, the upper floret fertile with hardened grain-like lemma,
enclosed in bur-like involucres with bristles and spines that penetrate the flesh and are quite
painful.
AA genus of 30 species of warm and dry regions of America, Africa, and India. The “burs” are
particularly problematic in areas where sheep are raised. (Modification of the old Greek name,
cenchros, of Setaria italica) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: DeLisle 1963; Crins 1991.

1. Bur with 1 whorl of united flattened spines confined to lower part of bur, subtended by 1–sev-
   eral whorls of shorter, finer bristles                                                             C. echinatus
1. Bur with more than one whorl of flattened spines, the spines present irregularly throughout the
   body of the bur, usually not subtended by whorls of bristles.
   2. Bur usually with 8–40 spines, the base of larger spines often to 1.5 mm wide, the base of bur
      usually without numerous, thin, down-pointing spines                                               C. spinifex
1254 POACEAE/CHASMANTHIUM

  2. Bur usually with 45–75 spines, the base of larger spines 1 mm wide or less, the base of bur with
     numerous, thin, down-pointing spines                                                             C. longispinus

Cenchrus echinatus L., (finger-like), SOUTHERN SANDBUR, HEDGE-HOG GRASS, CADILLO. Annual
with geniculate or trailing culms to 85 cm long; bur short pubescent; spines and bristles
retrorsely barbed. Disturbed areas; included based on citations for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by
Gould (1975b) and Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX. Spring–fall.

Cenchrus longispinus (Hack.) Fernald, (long-spined), LONG-SPINE SANDBUR. Annual; culms
partly decumbent, 15–65 cm long; bur long-pubescent; spines retrorsely barbed. Sandy or grav-
elly sites, disturbed areas; Grayson, Montague, and Parker cos., also Tarrant Co. (R. O’Kennon,
pers. obs.); Oak-pine s and w to w TX. Jun–Oct.

Cenchrus spinifex Cav., (spiny), COMMON SANDBUR, GRASSBUR. Perennial but flowering the first
year; culms partly decumbent, up to 100 cm long; bur glabrous to short-pubescent; spines
retrorsely barbed. Sandy or gravelly sites, disturbed areas; throughout TX. May–Oct. [C.
carolinianus of authors, not Walter, C. incertus M.A. Curtis] We are following Jones et al. (1997)
and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) for nomenclature of this species.

                                   CHASMANTHIUM WOOD-OATS
Perennials, ours rhizomatous; leaf blades broad, flat; ligule in ours a minute ciliate membrane;
inflorescence an open or contracted panicle (rarely a raceme); spikelets (2–)3–many-flowered,
laterally flattened, sometimes conspicuously so; glumes shorter than lemmas; lower 1–2 florets
often not seed-bearing; rachilla disarticulating above the glumes and between the florets.
AA genus of 6 species of e North America; in the past it was recognized as part of the genus
Uniola, which includes U. paniculata L., a coastal dune species, known as SEA OATS. However, it
is now recognized that Chasmanthium and Uniola, while superficially similar, belong in differ-
ent subfamilies. (Greek: chasme, gaping, and anthus, flower, presumably from the form of the
spikelets) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Centotheceae)
REFERENCES: Yates 1966a, 1966b; Clark 1990; Wipff & Jones 1994 [1995].

1. Inflorescence branches drooping, the spikelets long-pedicelled; spikelets (10–)20–50 mm long,
   6–17(–26)-flowered                                                                                    C. latifolium
1. Inflorescence branches erect or ascending, the spikelets subsessile or short-pedicelled; spikelets
   5–18 mm long, 3–7-flowered                                                                                C. laxum

Chasmanthium latifolium (Michx.) H.O. Yates, (broad-leaved), WILD OATS, BROAD-LEAF WOOD-
OATS, CREEK-OATS. Glabrous perennial, 0.4–1.5 m tall, with short rhizomes; culms leafy to 4/5 of
their height; leaf blades 8–20(–30) mm wide; spikelets conspicuously flat, very wide (6–20
mm). Along streams and in moist woods; one of our most common woodland grasses; e 1/2 of
TX. Jun–Sep. [Uniola latifolia Michx.] The large spikelet size makes this an excellent example to
use in demonstrating spikelet structure to students; the dried inflorescences are also sometimes
used ornamentally in dried flower arrangements.

Chasmanthium laxum (L.) H.O. Yates, (loose), Clumped perennial, glabrous or pubescent; culms
usually 0.7–1.5 m tall, leafy < 1/2 their height; leaf blades usually 4–12(–15) mm wide; spikelets
flat, 3–5 mm wide.

1. Leaf sheaths essentially glabrous or nearly so; collar of leaf sheaths glabrous; panicle branches ±
   appressed                                                                                                 var. laxum
1. Leaf sheaths (at least lower) usually long-pubescent or hirsute (rarely glabrous); collar of leaf
   sheaths pubescent; panicle branches ± divergent                                                   var. sessiliflorum
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1255




       Bromus japonicus [REE]                    Bromus pubescens [IOW]                            Bromus secalinus [REE]




Bromus tectorum var. tectorum [REE]              Buchloe dactyloides [HI1]                       Cenchrus echinatus [REE]




                    Cenchrus longispinus [REE]                                    Cenchrus spinifex [REE]
1256 POACEAE/CHLORIS

var. laxum. Moist, usually sandy areas; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage; mainly se and e TX.
Jun–Nov. [Uniola laxa (L.) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb.]

var. sessiliflorum (Poir.) Wipff & S.D. Jones, (sessile-flowered), NARROW-LEAF WOOD-OATS. Moist
forests and prairie openings, sandy soils; Fannin and Lamar cos. in Red River drainage; mainly
se and e TX. Jun–Nov. We are following Wipff and Jones (1994 [1995]) for the nomenclature of
this taxon. [C. laxum subsp. sessiliflorum (Poir.) L.G. Clark, C. sessiliflorum (Poir.) H.O. Yates,
Uniola sessiliflora Poir.]

                                      CHLORIS WINDMILL GRASS
Annuals or perennials; leaf sheaths strongly compressed and sharply keeled; ligule a ciliate
membrane; branches of inflorescence digitately or subdigitately arranged at tip of culm or in
several whorls; spikelets with 1 perfect floret at base and 1 or more reduced ones above; margins
of perfect lemmas often variously pubescent.
AA genus of 40 species of tropical and warm areas of the world; it includes some pasture
grasses. (Named for Chloris, Greek mother of Nestor, goddess of flowers) (subfamily
Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCES: Nash 1898; Anderson 1974.

1. Branches of inflorescence in more than 1 whorl on main axis                                             C. verticillata
1. Branches of inflorescence in 1 whorl only.
   2. Awn of lower lemmas 1.5 mm or less long; lower lemmas 1.5–2 mm long                                    C. cucullata
   2. Awn of lower lemmas 2 mm or more long; lower lemmas 2.2–4.2 mm long.
      3. Inflorescences appearing bristly-woolly at arms length; awns 5–15 mm long; upper mar-
         gins of lower lemmas with a prominent tuft of hairs to ca. 2–3 mm long; plants annual                 C. virgata
      3. Inflorescences not appearing bristly-woolly at arms length; awns 1.5–6 mm long; upper
         margins of lower lemmas with or without a tuft of hairs; plants perennial.
         4. Sterile or staminate florets (1–)2–4, similar to perfect floret but smaller, often tapering to
            apex, much longer than wide; upper margins of lower lemmas with a prominent tuft of
            hairs                                                                                              C. gayana
         4. Sterile or staminate floret 1, usually distinctly different from perfect floret, often with a
            squared-off apex, often nearly as wide as long, sometimes triangular; upper margins of
            lower lemmas without a prominent tuft of hairs                                         C. subdolichostachya

Chloris cucullata Bisch., (hooded), HOODED WINDMILL GRASS, CROWFOOT GRASS, HOODED FINGER
GRASS. Perennial; panicle branches 10–20, 2–5 cm long; lower lemma broadly elliptic; sterile flo-
ret 1, conspicuously inflated. Sandy soils; mainly East and West cross timbers in nc TX; in
much of TX except far e part. Apr–Oct.

Chloris gayana Kunth, (for Jacques Etienne Gay, 1786–1864, French botanist), RHODES GRASS. Pe-
rennial; panicle branches 9–30, 8–15 cm long; lemma of lower (perfect) floret 2.5–3.2 mm long,
somewhat gibbous (= swollen on 1 side), the awn 1.5–6.5 mm long; sterile florets somewhat gib-
bous. Cultivated forage grass, escapes along roadsides; included based on citation for vegeta-
tional area 5 by Hignight et al. (1988); mainly s TX. May–Dec. Probably native to e Africa. I

Chloris subdolichostachya Müll.Hal., (somewhat small-spiked), SHORT-SPIKE WINDMILL GRASS.
Perennial, stoloniferous; panicle branches 5–numerous, 3–17 cm long; lemma of lower (perfect)
floret 2.2–2.9 mm long, not gibbous, the awn 2–5 mm long; sterile florets variable. Disturbed
sandy sites; in much of e 1/2 of TX. May–Oct. [Chloris latisquamea Nash] Jones et al. (1997)
treated this taxon as C. ⫻subdolichostachya [C. cucullata ⫻ C. verticillata].

Chloris verticillata Nutt., (whorled), TUMBLE WINDMILL GRASS, WINDMILL FINGER GRASS. Peren-
                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1257




Chasmanthium latifolium [USB]   Chasmanthium laxum var. laxum [USB]       Chasmanthium laxum var. sessiliflorum [USB]




 Chloris cucullata [USB]                  Chloris gayana [GO1]                   Chloris subdolichostachya [GO1]




  Chloris verticillata [USB]             Chloris virgata [HI1]                       Coelorachis cylindrica [HI1]
1258 POACEAE/COELORACHIS

nial; panicle branches 5–15 cm long, 10–16 per verticil, in 2–5 verticils; lemma of lower (perfect)
floret 2–3.5 mm long, not gibbous; sterile floret 1, slightly inflated. Disturbed clay or sandy sites;
mainly Blackland Prairie w to w TX. A minor member of original prairie, increasing under dis-
turbance. May–Oct.

Chloris virgata Sw., (twiggy, wand-like), FEATHER FINGER GRASS, SHOWY CHLORIS. Annual;
panicle branches 5–10 cm long, 4–20; lemma of lower (perfect) floret 2.5–4.2 mm long, gibbous,
producing beaked apical appearance; sterile floret 1, similar to fertile except smaller. Disturbed
prairies and roadsides; throughout TX. May–Nov.

Enteropogon chlorideus (J. Presl) Clayton, (genus: ? Greek, entero, intestine, and pogon, beard; sp.:
presumably for resemblance to Chloris), (BURY-SEED CHLORIS), previously treated in Chloris [as C.
chloridea (J. Presl) Hitchc.], is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2), appar-
ently based on a Brazos Co. record (Gould 1975b) to the se of nc TX. This species can be distin-
guished by the lemma of lower (perfect) floret 4.5–7.5 mm long (versus < 4.5 mm long in all nc
TX Chloris species) and the plants with underground cleistogamous spikelets at the tips of rhi-
zomes (not present in any nc TX Chloris species).

                                 COELORACHIS JOINT-TAIL
AA mainly tropical genus of 21 species; related to Rottboellia. (Greek: coelo, hollow, and rachis,
spine or backbone, possibly from the niches in the rachis (= inflorescence axis) into which the
spikelets fit) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Clayton 1970; Veldkamp et al. 1986.

Coelorachis cylindrica (Michx.) Nash, (cylindrical), CAROLINA JOINT-TAIL. Glabrous perennial
with hard-based, solitary or loosely clumped, erect to over-arched culms 25–100 cm long; old
plants with short, knotty rhizomes; ligule a short membrane 0.5-1 mm long; inflorescence a
very slender (ca. 3 mm thick), elongate cylindrical spike-like raceme (pencil-like but much
smaller in diam.) breaking apart at the nodes of the inflorescence axis, the base of each intern-
ode with a niche on one side into which the spikelets fit closely; spikelets awnless, in pairs of 1
sessile, fertile (with a pitted glume) and 1 pedicelled, sterile. Prairies and open woods, sandy or
clayey soils; widespread in e 1/2 of TX. May–Jun. An important component of certain native
sandy prairies, including “mima mound” prairies. [Manisuris cylindrica (Michx.) Kuntze,
Mnesithea cylindrica (Michx.) de Koning & Sosef] Jones et al. (1997) treated this species as
Mnesithea cylindrica; however, J. Wipff (pers. comm.) has since indicated that the species is bet-
ter treated in the genus Coelorachis.

                                CORTADERIA PAMPAS GRASS
AA genus of 24 species of coarse, clump-forming grasses native to South America, New
Zealand, and New Guinea. (From the Argentinian name; a term for cutting) (subfamily
Chloridoideae, tribe Danthonieae)

Cortaderia selloana (Schult. & Schult.f.) Asch. & Graebn., (for Friedrich Sellow, 1789–1831, Ger-
man botanist who collected in South America), PAMPAS GRASS. Dioecious perennial to ca. 3 m
tall, forming large clumps to 1 m or more in diam.; leaves mostly basal, the blades usually 0.6–1
m or more long, with scabrous margins; ligule a dense tuft of hairs 3–5 mm long; inflorescence
a showy, densely flowered, silvery, feathery panicle 25–100 cm long; spikelets 2–3-flowered, dis-
articulation above glumes and between florets; pistillate lemmas with long silky hairs; stami-
nate lemmas glabrous. No escaped nc TX specimens have been seen, but this species is widely
cultivated throughout TX as a lawn ornamental and long persists. Sep–Nov. Native from Brazil
to Argentina and Chile. I
                                                                           CYNODON/POACEAE 1259

                               CYNODON BERMUDA GRASS
AA tropical and warm area genus of 8 species; it includes pasture and lawn grasses. (Greek:
cyon, dog, and odous, tooth, from the close rows of tooth-like spikelets or the hard scales on rhi-
zomes) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCE: deWet & Harlan 1970.

Cynodon dactylon (L.) Pers., (fingered), BERMUDA GRASS, BAHAMA GRASS. Rhizomatous and
stoloniferous perennial 10–40 cm tall; leaf sheaths compressed, keeled, with tufts of hairs at
summit; lower leaf sheaths also pilose on back; ligule a short ciliate membrane 0.2–0.5 mm
long; branches of inflorescence usually digitately arranged at tip of culm; spikelets with 1 per-
fect awnless floret, closely overlapping, in 2 rows on a flattened or triangular branch. Culti-
vated in nc TX since about 1882 for pasture and lawns (Mahler 1988), also a common weed
throughout TX. May–Oct. Native probably of Africa, but India has been suggested also (not
from Bermuda, despite the common name). Reported to be an important cause of hay fever and
potentially poisonous to livestock due to the production of hydrocyanic acid under certain en-
vironmental conditions (Lewis & Elvin-Lewis 1977; Fuller & McClintock 1986).  I

                                           DACTYLIS
AA genus of 1–5 Eurasian species (often considered monotypic). (Greek dactylus, finger; a
name used by Pliny for a grass with digitate spikes or from the crowded spikelets at inflores-
cence tips) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)

Dactylis glomerata L., (clustered), ORCHARD GRASS, COCK’S-FOOT. Erect, densely clumped peren-
nial to 1 m tall; leaf blades 2–10 mm wide; ligules membranous, 2–5 mm long; panicles long
exerted, with or without elongated lower branches, of rather dense terminal aggregations of
nearly sessile groups of spikelets; spikelets usually with 2–5 flowers, ca. 5–9 mm long. Road-
sides, field margins, yard weed; Grayson (first observed 1998) and Tarrant (first observed 1996)
cos.; introduced as a forage grass, now a weed in scattered localities in TX. Spring–Summer. Na-
tive to Eurasia. This species is now widely naturalized in North America and s Africa; it is an
important cause of hay-fever and is complex genetically, there being diploid and tetraploid
forms (Mabberley 1997). I

                            DACTYLOCTENIUM CROWFOOT
AA genus of 10 species of warm areas of the world. (Greek dactylos, finger, and ctenion, a little
comb, referring to the finger-like arrangement of the comb-like inflorescence branches) (sub-
family Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCE: Peterson et al. 1997.

Dactyloctenium aegyptium (L.) P. Beauv., (of Egypt), CROWFOOT, DURBAN CROWFOOT GRASS,
EGYPTIAN CROWFOOT GRASS. Annual with culms mostly 10–60 cm tall, often rooting at lower
nodes; ligule a membrane usually 0.1–1 mm long, fringed with short hairs; leaf blades 2–9 mm
wide; inflorescences with 2–7(–more) digitately arranged branches usually 1.5–6 cm long;
branch tip projecting 1–7 mm beyond terminal spikelets as a sharp point; spikelets sessile, very
crowded, in 2 rows along one side of the narrow flattened branch, strongly laterally com-
pressed, usually 3–4 mm long, with 3–5 flowers; second glumes and lemmas usually with short
awns. Usually sandy soils, moist areas, disturbed sites; Bell Co.; se and e TX w to s part of nc TX,
also Edwards Plateau. (Jul–)Sep–Dec. Native of the Old World tropics. I

                              DANTHONIA POVERTY-OATS
AA genus of 100 species native to North America, South America, Europe, Australia, and New
1260 POACEAE/DESMAZERIA

Zealand. (Named for Etienne Danthoine, an early 19th century French botanist of Marseilles)
(subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Danthonieae)
REFERENCE: Darbyshire & Cayouette 1989.

Danthonia spicata (L.) P. Beauv. ex Roem. & Schult., (with spikes), POVERTY-OATS, POVERTY
DANTHONIA, POVERTY OAT GRASS. Tufted perennial 25–50 cm tall, with crowded, mostly basal
leaves; leaf sheaths pilose near summit; leaf blades persistent, curling in age; ligule a short
membrane with long-ciliate margin longer than base; inflorescences narrow, short, spike-like;
spikelets erect, 10–13(–15) mm long, with 3–7(–9) florets, on pedicels ca. 1–8 mm long; glumes
much longer than lemmas; lemmas awned from between apical acute or acuminate teeth, the
awns ca. 5–7 mm long, spirally twisted near base, geniculate. Sandy open woods; Dallas,
Grayson, Hunt, and Lamar cos.; mainly e TX. May–Jul.

                                               DESMAZERIA
AA genus of 3 species native from Europe to n Africa and Iran; treated here as including
Catapodium. (Named for J.B. Desmazieres, French botanist) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)

Desmazeria rigida (L.) Tutin, (rigid), Glabrous tufted annual 10–30 cm tall; ligule a membrane
1.5–4 mm long; panicles usually 3–10 cm long, narrow, dense, erect; spikelets (4–)5–9(–10)-flow-
ered; glumes and lemmas awnless. Railroads, stock pens, roadsides, and disturbed areas; Hill
Co., also Ellis and Wise cos. (Mahler 1988); scattered in e 1/2 of TX. Apr–May. Native of Europe.
Sometimes recognized in the genus Catapodium [as C. rigidum (L.) C.E. Hubb. ex Dony].
[Scleropoa rigida (L.) Griseb.] I

                                      DIARRHENA BEAKGRAIN
Rhizomatous perennials; culms arching; leaves basal and low cauline; leaf blades flat; ligule a
membrane; inflorescence a narrow panicle, long exserted and arching; spikelets with 3–5 flo-
rets, the terminal floret reduced and sterile; florets often ± spreading at maturity; glumes 2,
awnless; lemmas ± rounded on back, awnless, with a sharp cusp 1–2 mm long at apex; caryopsis
(= fruit or grain) with a beak.
AA genus of 4 species of e Asia and North America. Subfamilial classification of this genus is
problematic with some authorities putting it in the Pooideae and others in the Bambusoideae
(Brandenburg et al. 1991a). The following key is from Brandenburg et al. (1991a). (Greek: dis,
twice, and arrhen, male, from the two stamens) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Diarrheneae)
ReFERENCE: Brandenburg et al. 1991a.

1. Callus pubescent on all mature lemmas except first; lemmas widest below the middle and gradu-
   ally tapering into a cusp at apex, those of first floret 7.1–10.8 mm long; mature fruits 1.3–1.8 mm
   broad, gradually tapering into a broad, blunt beak                                                  D. americana
1. Callus glabrous on all mature lemmas; lemmas widest near or above the middle and ± abruptly
   contracted into cusp at apex, those of the first floret 4.6–7.5 mm long; mature fruits 1.8–2.5 mm
   broad, abruptly contracted into a bottlenose-shaped beak                                               D. obovata

Diarrhena americana P. Beauv., (of America), AMERICAN BEAKGRAIN. Culms ca. 0.6–1.3 m long;
leaf blades 7–20 mm wide; ligule a membranous collar 0.5–1.8 mm long; inflorescences 9–30
cm long, with 4–23 spikelets; spikelets 10–20 mm long; lemmas (3.8–)5.3–10.8 mm long, gla-
brous to scaberulous; anthers (1.7–)2–2.9(–3.5) mm long. This species has long been reported
from nc TX based on a Reverchon collection from Dallas (Mahler 1988). However, Dallas mate-
rial is of the recently named, related species, D. obovata (Brandenburg et al. (1991a). Diarrhena
americana, native to the e U.S., is known from e OK but is apparently unknown from TX
(Brandenburg et al. (1991a). Hatch et al. (1990) reported D. americana from vegetational area 1
                                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1261




         Cortaderia selloana [EN2]                           Cynodon dactylon [REE]                            Dactylis glomerata [HI1]




Dactyloctenium aegyptium [USB]                           Danthonia spicata [USB]                         Desmazeria rigida [BR2]




                                                                                      CALLUS       CARYOPSIS




                                     INFLORESCENCE       MATURE                                                          IMMATURE
                                          AXIS           SPIKELET                                                         SPIKELET
                                                                              ___________ LEMMAS ___________

                                                     Diarrhena americana [TOR, USB]
1262 POACEAE/DICHANTHIUM

(deep e TX), but it is not known which species this citation represents. Diarrhena americana is
included here to help clarify recent changes in the taxonomy of the genus. Summer–fall.

Diarrhena obovata (Gleason) Brandenburg, (obovate, inversely ovate). Culms ca. 0.5–1.3 m long;
leaf blades 6–18 mm wide; ligules 0.2–1 mm long; inflorescences 5–30 cm long, with 4–33
spikelets; spikelets 7–17 mm long; lemmas 4.6–7.5 mm long, glabrous; anthers 1.4–2 mm long.
Woodlands; collected by Reverchon in Jun, 1874, in “rich woods, Buzzards Spring” (now in e
Dallas and a residential section), not found in nc TX since (cited in Mahler 1988 as D.
americana); Brandenburg et al. (1991a) indicated that the only TX collection is from Dallas Co.
Summer–fall. [D. americana var. obovata Gleason]

                                     DICHANTHIUM BLUESTEM
AAn Old World tropical genus of 10 species; formerly treated in a more inclusive Andropogon.
(presumably from Greek: dicho, in two, and anthus, flower, in reference to the paired spikelets)
(subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCE: Gould 1967.

Dichanthium annulatum (Forssk.) Stapf, (ringed, ring-like), KLEBERG BLUESTEM. Perennial super-
ficially resembling Bothriochloa ischaemum var. songarica (KING RANCH BLUESTEM) but with
much longer and more consicuous lemma awns; culms both erect and stoniferous; nodes
bearded with a conspicuous ring of long white hairs; ligule a short membrane; inflorescences
with (2–)3–5(–8) spicate branches, the lowest pair of spikelets on the branches usually without
awns and not producing seeds; main inflorescence axis and branches just below spikelets gla-
brous; pedicels and inflorescence branches without a groove or membranous area; spikelets in
pairs, one sessile, awned, the other pedicelled, awnless; pedicelled spikelets ca. the same size as
the sessile spikelets, rounded apically; awn of lemma of sessile spikelets ca. 2–2.5 cm long; dis-
articulation at base of sessile spikelet so that the associated pedicel and section of the inflores-
cence branch fall with the sessile spikelet. Introduced as a forage grass, disturbed areas; Coryell
Co. (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997); mainly introduced in se and s TX. Flowering throughout the
growing season. [Andropogon annulatus Forsk.] Native of Africa to India and China. I

                            DIGITARIA CRAB GRASS, FINGER GRASS
Annuals or perennials; ligules membranous; inflorescences often digitate or nearly so (some-
times with branches below the terminal cluster), with few to numerous unbranched spike-like
branches or an open, much-branched panicle (D. cognata); inflorescence branches winged or
unwinged; spikelets 2-flowered, the lower floret staminate or neuter, the upper floret perfect,
disarticulating below glumes; first glume minute or absent; second glume well-developed but
usually shorter than lemmas; lemma of lower spikelet resembling a glume; lemma margins
flat, not inrolled.
AA genus of ca. 220 species of tropical and warm areas of the world; many are weedy and
some are cultivated for food in Africa. As treated here, Digitaria includes Leptoloma. (Latin:
digitus, finger, from the finger-like arrangement of the inflorescence branches) (subfamily
Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Henrard 1950; Ebinger 1962; Gould 1963; Webster 1987; Crins 1991; Wipff & Hatch
1994.

1. Spikelets long-pedicelled (pedicels 2–several times as long as spikelet); inflorescence a much
   branched and rebranched, open panicle with spikelets far apart                                       D. cognata
1. Spikelets subsessile or on short, appressed pedicels; inflorescence of a few main unbranched
   branches digitately arranged or nearly so (or an unbranched panicle in D. filiformis), with spike-
   lets close together.
                                                                                       DIGITARIA/POACEAE 1263

  2. Inflorescence branches winged (wings often as wide as central part of branch); spikelets
     glabrous to short-pubescent.
     3. Spikelets 1.9–2.2 mm long; fertile lemma dark brown at maturity; mainly e TX, rare in nc
        TX                                                                                       D. ischaemum
     3. Spikelets 2.2–3.6 mm long; fertile lemma light brown or grayish; abundant in nc TX.
        4. Spikelets 2.2–3.3 mm long; second glume 1–1.8 mm long; leaf blades usually
           densely pubescent; lower lemmas minutely scabrous on lateral nerves (under a dissect-
           ing scope)                                                                            D. sanguinalis
        4. Spikelets 2.8–3.6 mm long; second glume 1.5–2.7 mm long; leaf blades glabrous or
           sparsely pubescent; lower lemmas smooth on lateral nerves                                   D. ciliaris
  2. Inflorescence branches not winged; spikelets silky-pubescent with long white-silky or pur-
     plish hairs OR not so.
     5. Spikelets silky-pubescent (inflorescences appearing conspicuously white-silky or
        purplish); spikelets 3–4 mm long; plants cespitose perennials; w part of nc TX            D. californica
    5. Spikelets not silky-pubescent (inflorescences not appearing white-silky or purplish);
       spikelets 1.5–2.6 mm long; plants tufted annuals; widespread in nc TX.
       6. Spikelets 1.5–1.9(–2) mm long; inflorescence branches usually 8–13 cm long                D. filiformis
       6. Spikelets 2–2.6 mm long; inflorescence branches usually 13–25 cm long                        D. villosa

Digitaria californica (Benth.) Henrard, (of California), CALIFORNIA COTTONTOP, ARIZONA
COTTONTOP. Perennial with erect culms ca. 50–100 cm tall; leaf blades glabrous; inflorescences
digitate or nearly so, the branches usually appressed, densely flowered; second glume and mar-
gins of lower floret densely long hairy, the hairs 2–4 mm long. Disturbed grasslands; Erath,
Lampasas, and Palo Pinto cos.; w part of nc TX s and w to w TX. May–Sep. [Trichachne
californica (Benth.) Chase]

Digitaria ciliaris (Retz.) Koeler, (ciliate, fringed), SOUTHERN CRAB GRASS. Annual; similar to D.
sanguinalis, differing in characteristics as enumerated in key. Common weed; throughout TX.
Jun–Nov. According to Gould (1975b), presumably introduced from the Old World. [D.
adscendens (Kunth) Henrard, D. sanguinalis var. ciliaris (Retz.) Parl.] I

Digitaria cognata (Schult.) Pilg., (related to), Clump-forming perennial 20–70 cm tall; culms
usually decumbent near base; lower leaf sheaths densely pubescent, upper glabrous; ligule a
membrane; panicles open, breaking off and acting as tumbleweeds; spikelets long-pedicelled,
narrowly lanceolate, acute; lower glume minute or absent; upper glume and sterile lemma
similar. In sandy soils, occasional in rocky or gravelly soils, open woods, fields, and disturbed
sites. May–Oct, but chiefly Aug–Oct. Sometimes recognized in the genus Leptoloma [as L.
cognatum (Schult.) Chase]. According to Wipff and Hatch (1994), the only character separating
Leptoloma and Digitaria is inflorescence type and that is unreliable. When examined world-
wide, there is no justification for separating the 2 genera. The key and nomenclature for this
species follows Wipff and Hatch (1994).

1. Lowermost (sterile) lemma 7-veined (rarely 6-); spikelets glabrous to pubescent; rhizomes
   absent                                                                                      subsp. cognata
1. Lowermost (sterile) lemma 5-veined; spikelets densely pubescent; rhizomes present or absent
                                                                                             subsp. pubiflora

subsp. cognata. FALL WITCH GRASS. Limestone, Montague, Palo Pinto, Parker, and Tarrant cos.;
widespread in e 1/2 of TX.

subsp. pubiflora (Vasey) Wipff, (with hairy flowers), WESTERN WITCH GRASS. Throughout TX.

Digitaria filiformis (L.) Koeler, (thread-like), SLENDER CRAB GRASS, SLENDER FINGER GRASS. An-
nual with erect culms 50–80 cm tall; inflorescences paniculate, the primary branches un-
1264 POACEAE/DISTICHLIS

branched; second glume usually 3/4 as long as fertile lemma. Sandy fields or woods; Grayson,
Parker, and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX. Sep–Oct.

Digitaria ischaemum (Schreb.) Muhl., (Greek: ischaemos, blood-restraining, from supposed styp-
tic properties), SMOOTH CRAB GRASS. Tufted annual to ca. 50 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous; inflo-
rescences digitate or nearly so, the branches ca. 3–9(–11) cm long; spikelets 1.9–2.2 mm long.
Open woods; included on basis of citation for vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990);
mainly far e TX. Aug–Nov. Native of Europe. I

Digitaria sanguinalis (L.) Scop., ( of blood-red color), HAIRY CRAB GRASS, LARGE CRAB GRASS. An-
nual; culms weak, rooting at nodes; leaves with papilla-based hairs; inflorescences digitate or
nearly so, usually with 4–9 branches 6–14 cm long; lemma of lower floret 5-veined, the lateral
nerves minutely scabrous above. Weed, much less common in nc TX than D. ciliaris; Hood and
Wise cos.; also Travis and Wichita cos. just s and w of nc TX; mainly w TX. Jul–Nov. Native of
Europe. I

Digitaria villosa (Walter) Pers., (softly hairy), SHAGGY CRAB GRASS. Similar to D. filiformis and
sometimes treated as a variety of that species; annual with erect culms to 125 cm or more tall,
much branched at base; second glume usually > 3/4 as long as fertile lemma, the second glume
and fertile lemma usually more pubescent than in D. filiformis. Disturbed sandy soils; Dallas
Co., also Milam and Limestone cos. at the e edge of nc TX, also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly se
and e TX. Aug–Nov. [D. filiformis (L.) Koeler var. villosa (Walter) Fernald] Jones et al. (1997)
treated this species as a variety of D. filiformis.

                        DISTICHLIS SALT GRASS, ALKALI GRASS
AA genus of 5 species, 4 in the New World, 1 in Australia. (Greek: distichos, two-ranked) (sub-
family Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCE: Peterson et al. 1997.

Distichlis spicata (L.) Greene, (with spikes), SALT GRASS, SPICATE SALT GRASS, INLAND SALT GRASS,
DESERT SALT GRASS, COASTAL SALT GRASS, SPIKE GRASS, ALKALI GRASS. Low glabrous perennial 10–
35(–70) cm tall from extensive scaly rhizomes; usually dioecious; flowering culms erect, the in-
ternodes short with leaf sheaths conspicuously overlapping at least on lower portion of culm;
leaves noticeably 2-ranked; leaf blades 2–20 cm long, 1–3 mm wide, often ± involute; ligule a
minute membrane < 0.5 mm long; inflorescences contracted spike-like panicles or spike-like
racemes 3–8 cm long; spikelets pedicellate, ± similar on male and female plants, usually 5–20-
flowered, 6–18(–28) mm long, awnless; disarticulation above glumes and between florets;
glumes slightly unequal; lemmas similar to glumes but longer and broader, 3–6 mm long,
keeled; pistillate lemmas coriaceous, enclosing the caryopsis; paleas as long as lemmas or nearly
so. In w 1/2 of TX in alkaline or alkaline-saline areas, along the coast in saline marshes and flats;
Brown Co., also Comanche Co. (Stanford 1971); mainly se TX, also Edwards Plateau and Rolling
Plains w to w TX. [Distichlis spicata var. stricta (Torr.) Scribn.] Nc TX plants fall into var. stricta,
which is here lumped; according to Gould (1975b), this variety “appears to represent little more
than a variable series of inland populations of Distichlis spicata growing under a wide range of
soil and climatic conditions.”

                            ECHINOCHLOA BARNYARD GRASS
Annuals (our species); ligules absent; panicles dense; spikelets of 2 florets (1 perfect), subsessile,
crowded along one side of branches, glabrous, pubescent, or hispid; first glume present, much
shorter than second; second glume and lemma of lower (sterile) floret similar; lemma of perfect
floret hardened, grain-like, smooth and shiny with inrolled margins.
                                                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1265




                                                    CALLUS         CARYOPSIS




                MATURE
                SPIKELET
                                                                                        IMMATURE
INFLORESCENCE                         ___________ LEMMAS ___________                     SPIKELET
     AXIS

                                   Diarrhena obovata [TOR]                                             Dichanthium annulatum [GO1]




        Digitaria californica [GO3]                          Digitaria ciliaris [GO4]                Digitaria cognata subsp. cognata [HI1]




      Digitaria filiformis [HI1]                     Digitaria ischaemum [REE]                            Digitaria sanguinalis [REE]
1266 POACEAE/ECHINOCHLOA

AA genus of ca. 35 species of warm areas of the world. Echinochloa species are often extremely
variable, making absolute distinctions between taxa difficult. (Greek: echinus, sea-urchin, and
chloa, grass, referring to the bristling awns) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Hitchcock 1920b; Gould et al. 1972; Crins 1991.

1. Leaf sheaths hirsute or hispid; lemma of lower floret usually with awn 1.5–6 cm long (occasion-
   ally short-awned or awnless)                                                                              E. walteri
1. Leaf sheaths glabrous; lemma of lower floret awnless or variously awned.
   2. Palea of lower floret absent or vestigial; spikelets awnless or infrequently with awns to 0.9 cm
      long                                                                                            E. crus-pavonis
   2. Palea of lower floret well-developed; spikelets awnless or awned, the awns if present variable
      in length, to 6 cm long.
      3. Inflorescence branches 3–7, usually 2(–3) cm or less long; spikelets 2.5–3 mm long, awnless,
         arranged in 4 regular rows, with hairs without papillate bases; leaf blades 3–6(–9) mm wide
                                                                                                            E. colona
     3. Inflorescence and spikelets without the above combination; leaf blades ca. 3–30 mm wide.
        4. Lemmas with awns usually 1.5–6 cm long; inflorescences usually very large, (10–)20–40
           cm or more long and up to 10 cm thick; rare glabrous-sheathed form of this species
                                                                                                            E. walteri
       4. Lemmas awnless or variously awned; inflorescences variable, often smaller; weedy
          species widespread in nc TX.
          5. Fertile lemma obtuse to broadly acute, with a sharply differentiated, withering, mem-
             branous tip; spikelets without papilla-based hairs                                          E. crus-galli
          5. Fertile lemma acute to acuminate, tapering to a firm, stiff tip; spikelets usually with
             some stout, papilla-based hairs                                                              E. muricata

Echinochloa colona (L.) Link, (farmer), JUNGLE-RICE, SHAMA-MILLET. Spikelets 2.5–3 mm long.
Low ground, disturbed areas; throughout TX. Jul–Nov. Native of Old World tropics. I

Echinochloa crus-galli (L.) P. Beauv., (cockspur), BARNYARD GRASS. Spikelets 2.8–4 mm long; lower
lemma awnless or with an awn to over 5 cm long. Low ground, disturbed areas; throughout TX.
Jun–Oct. Apparently introduced from the tropics. I

Echinochloa crus-pavonis (Kunth) Schult. var. macera (Wiegand) Gould, (sp.: peacock spur; var.:
soften). Spikelets 2.8–3.1 mm long. Disturbed areas; nearly throughout TX. Jul–Nov.

Echinochloa muricata (P. Beauv.) Fernald, (with numerous minute short points, roughened).
Spikelets green or purple, usually conspicuously echinate with stout, papilla-based hairs. Low
moist areas. Jul–Nov.

1. Spikelets 3.5 mm or less long (excluding awn); awn of lemma of lower floret absent to 6
   mm long                                                                                         var. microstachya
1. Spikelets 3.5 mm or more long (excluding awn); awn of lemma of lower floret usually 6–
   25 mm long (rarely absent)                                                                           var. muricata

var. microstachya Wiegand, (small-spiked). Throughout TX.

var. muricata. Widespread in TX.

Echinochloa walteri (Pursh) A. Heller, (for an early Carolinian botanist, Thomas Walter, ?1740–
1789). Plant 1–2 m tall; leaf sheaths usually hirsute or hispid with papilla-based hairs, espe-
cially toward apex, rarely glabrous; spikelets 3–5 mm long (excluding awn), without or with
papilla-based hairs; awn of lemma of lower floret usually 1.5–6 cm long but occasionally short-
awned or awnless. Low moist areas; Bell, Grayson, and Kaufman cos.; se and e TX w to Black-
land Prairie, also Edwards Plateau. Jul–Nov.
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1267
                                                     乆


                                                                     乆




                                                                么



     Digitaria villosa [GO2]              Distichlis spicata [GO1]                             Echinochloa colona [MAS]




Echinochloa crus-galli [REE]   Echinochloa crus-pavonis var. macra [HI1]              Echinochloa muricata var. muricata [RYD]




Echinochloa walteri [GO1]                                                  Eleusine indica [REE]
1268 POACEAE/ELEUSINE

                                        ELEUSINE GOOSE GRASS
AA genus of ca. 9 species of Africa and South America including E. coracana (L.) Gaertn. (FIN-
GER-MILLET), an important grain crop in Africa and India cultivated since the 3rd Millenium
BC. (Named from Eleusis, Greek town where Ceres, the goddess of harvests, was worshiped)
(subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCE: Peterson et al. 1997.

Eleusine indica (L.) Gaertn., (of India), GOOSE GRASS, YARD GRASS, ZACATE GUAIMA. Annual with
decumbent to erect culms 15–65 cm long; leaf sheaths compressed, keeled, pilose on margins;
ligule a short membrane; branches of inflorescence crowded at tip of culm, usually digitate or
with 1–2 branches attached lower; spikelets awnless, crowded, overlapping, in two rows on flat-
tened winged branches. Common weed of gardens, lawns, and disturbed sites; throughout TX.
Late Jun–Oct. Native of Old World tropics. I

                                             ELYMUS WILD RYE
Ours perennials with solitary or few culms in small clumps; leaf blades auricled at base; ligule a
membrane; inflorescence a dense unbranched 2-sided spike with 2–3 sessile spikelets per node,
the inflorescence axis in our species remaining intact, disarticulation occurring above glumes
and between florets; spikelets with 2–6 florets; glumes and lemmas awned.
AA n temperate, especially Asian, genus of ca. 150 species. (Ancient Greek name for millet;
from elyo, rolled up, from the caryopsis (= fruit) being tightly embraced by the lemma and
palea) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Triticeae)
REFERENCES: Pohl 1959; Bowden 1964b; Church 1967; Runemark & Heneen 1968; Davies 1980;
Dewey 1982; Estes & Tyrl 1982.

1. Glumes strongly 1–4-ribbed to base or nearly so, 0.2–1.5 mm wide near middle, not or only
   slightly bowed out at base, flat, neither yellowish, hardened nor rounded basally, with awn equaling
   or exceeding the body; lemma awns usually curving outward at maturity, 15–50 mm long
                                                                                                          E. canadensis
1. Glumes strongly 3–8-ribbed above base, 1.0–2.5 mm wide near middle, often strongly bowed
   out at base, often yellowish, hardened or rounded basally, with awn shorter than or equaling the
   body; lemma awns straight or slightly curved, 5–25 mm long                                              E. virginicus

Elymus canadensis L., (of Canada), CANADA WILD RYE, NODDING WILD RYE. Plant 40–160 cm tall;
leaf blades mostly 4–12 mm wide; leaf sheaths glabrous; ligule a membrane 0.5–1 mm long;
spikes thick, usually oblique or nodding, (4–)8–21 cm long and 6–18 mm thick (excluding
awns). Thickets and open woods, in limestone or sandy clay; in nc TX mainly East and West
cross timbers, throughout most of TX. (Mar–)late May–Jun. [E. canadensis L. var. brachystachys
(Scribn. & C.R. Ball) Farw., E. canadensis L. var. villosus (Muhl.) Shinners]

Elymus virginicus L., (of Virginia), VIRGINIA WILD RYE. Plant 30–140 cm tall; leaf blades 5–15 mm
wide; leaf sheaths glabrous or scabrous-pubescent, only the uppermost to all of the leaf sheaths
inflated; ligule a minute membrane; spikes rather dense and stiff, usually erect, partly included
to well-exserted, usually 3–15 cm long. Thickets or open ground; in much of e 1/2 of TX. (Apr–
)May–Aug. [E. virginicus L. var. glabriflorus (Vasey) Bush] Hybrids with E. canadensis are
known (Pohl 1959).

                                       ERAGROSTIS LOVE GRASS
Annuals or perennials; ligule a ring of hairs (except in E. secundiflora); spikelets in very open or
contracted panicles, 2–many-flowered, sometimes with a reddish purple color, often somewhat
                                                                                        ERAGROSTIS/POACEAE 1269

laterally compressed; lemmas obtuse or acute, awnless, rounded or keeled on back, 3-nerved,
the lateral nerves sometimes obscure, glabrous.
AA genus of ca. 300 species of temperate and tropical areas of the world; some are cultivated
as ornamentals, for fodder, and for edible seeds; some have inflorescences which detach and dis-
perse the seeds by acting as tumbleweeds. (Greek: eros, love or god of love, and agrostis, a grass)
(subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCES: Koch 1974, 1978; Witherspoon 1977; Perry & McNeill 1986; Van den Borre &
Watson 1994; Peterson et al. 1997.

1. Culms creeping, rooting at nodes; plants mat-forming annuals; flowering culms up to 25 cm tall
   (usually less).
   2. Plants dioecious; anthers 1.2–2 mm long; lemmas (1.8–)2.6–3.5 mm long; styles long exserted
      from lemma and palea, often persistent and conspicuous (with a lens) as thread-like
      structures                                                                                            E. reptans
   2. Plants monoecious; anthers 0.5 mm or less long; lemmas 1.5–2(–2.3) mm long; styles not
      exserted                                                                                          E. hypnoides
1. Culms erect; plants clump-forming annuals or perennials; flowering culms usually much more
   than 25 cm tall.
   3. Panicle branches bearing spikelets to base or nearly so.
      4. Spikelets sessile, widely spaced on long branches                                            E. sessilispica
      4. Spikelets sessile or short-pedicelled, closely crowded on short branches.
         5. Spikelets 3–10 mm wide, usually < 2 times as long as wide, strongly compressed; intro-
            duced species rare in nc TX                                                                    E. superba
         5. Spikelets up to 5 mm wide (often much narrower), > 2 times as long as wide (often many
            times), usually slightly to strongly compressed; including abundant and widespread na-
            tive and introduced species.
            6. Plants perennial; spikelets 3–5 mm wide, strongly flattened; lemmas very acute, 2–5
               mm long                                                                               E. secundiflora
            6. Plants annual; spikelets 1–4 mm wide, flattened but not strongly so OR not flattened;
               lemmas subacute or obtuse, 1.6–2.8 mm long.
               7. Spikelets linear, almost as thick as wide, 1–1.5 mm wide; lemmas not glandular-
                  dotted                                                                                 E. barrelieri
               7. Spikelets ovate to lanceolate, much wider than thick, 2–4 mm wide; lemmas
                  usually glandular-dotted on the keels                                                 E. cilianensis
   3. Panicle branches naked for a distance from base.
      8. Spikelets widely spreading from branches; pedicels longer than spikelets.
         9. Spikelets 2–4(–6)-flowered, 2–4 mm long                                                         E. hirsuta
         9. Spikelets (4–)5–18-flowered, 4–10 mm long.
            10. Spikelets very narrow, usually 1(–1.3) mm or less wide; lemmas 1.2–1.6 mm long
                                                                                                              E. pilosa
            10. Spikelets 1.5–3 mm wide; lemmas 1.8–3.4 mm long.
                 11. Lemmas keeled, the lateral nerves conspicuous; spikelets 4–10(–20) mm long.
                     12. Lemmas ca 1.4–2.2 mm long; spikelets oblong to linear; plants with knotty
                         rhizomes                                                                       E. spectabilis
                     12. Lemmas 2.4–3.8 mm long; spikelets lanceolate to ovate; plants without
                         rhizomes                                                                        E. trichodes
                 11. Lemmas rounded on back, the lateral nerves inconspicuous; spikelets 3–5(–6)
                     mm long                                                                          E. intermedia
      8. Spikelets slightly spreading or appressed along the branches, sessile or on pedicels mostly
         shorter than spikelets (some pedicels may be longer).
1270 POACEAE/ERAGROSTIS

      13. Culm bases neither hardened nor enlarged; plants annual.
          14. Closed spikelets (before lemmas spread open) over 1 mm wide; lemmas 2–2.4 mm
               long; leaf blades 3–7 mm wide; lower inflorescence branches 1–3, if somewhat ver-
               ticillate then not hair-like                                                          E. pectinacea
          14. Closed spikelets 1 mm wide or less; lemmas 1.2–1.6 mm long; leaf blades 0.4–2.2
               (–3) mm wide; lower inflorescence branches hair-like, usually verticillate (in
               whorls of 3 or more branches)                                                              E. pilosa
      13. Culm bases hardened or enlarged; plants perennial.
          15. Longer glume 1–1.9 mm long; spikelets 4–5 mm long                                E. curtipedicellata
          15. Longer glume 2.2–5 mm long; spikelets 6–20(–25) mm long.
              16. Spikelets 3–5 mm wide; culms 70 cm or less tall; spikelets 10–40-flowered, often
                    brown-red, densely arranged, in conspicuously overlapping groups               E. secundiflora
              16. Spikelets 1.4–1.6 mm wide; culms to 150 cm tall; spikelets 7–11-flowered,
                    gray-green, less dense, not much overlapping                                         E. curvula

Eragrostis barrelieri Daveau, (for French botanist, Jacques Barrelier, d. 1673), MEDITERRANEAN
LOVE GRASS. Low-spreading to erect annual 7–50 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous except at top;
panicles dense; spikelets gray- or yellow-green to bronze or dark purple-red-brown; lemmas
1.8–2.2 mm long. Roadsides and disturbed sites; nearly throughout TX. Apr–Nov. Native of
s Europe. I

Eragrostis cilianensis (All.) Vignalo ex Janch., (fringed with hairs), STINK GRASS. Annual often
with a strong odor; lemmas 2.2–2.8 mm long, with minute, raised, glandular dots on keel. Dis-
turbed sites; throughout TX. Mostly Aug–Oct. Native of Europe. I

Eragrostis curtipedicellata Buckley, (short-stalked), GUMMY LOVE GRASS, SHORT-STALKED LOVE
GRASS. Tufted, hard-based perennial 15–75 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous except for margins and
summit; panicles open, with viscid axis, breaking off in age. Sandy oak woods, fields, roadsides,
and open areas; nearly throughout TX. May–Nov.

Eragrostis curvula (Schrad.) Nees, (curved), WEEPING LOVE GRASS. Clump-forming perennial 60–
150 cm tall; upper leaf sheaths usually glabrous, the lower pubescent with closely ascending
hairs; panicles narrow, ± drooping. Planted on sandy soils for erosion control and range im-
provement; fields, roadsides; now widespread in TX. May–Jul. Native of Africa. Cattle wait until
more palatable species are gone before eating the rather coarse foliage; subsequently they will
eat this species nearly to the ground; the hard stubble that remains will hurt their feet making
them “tender-footed” and hesitant to walk and properly feed; they have to be removed from
such a pasture (J. Stanford, pers. comm.). I

Eragrostis hirsuta (Michx.) Nees, (hairy), BIG-TOP LOVE GRASS, STOUT LOVE GRASS. Tufted peren-
nial; spikelets small (to 4 mm long), few-flowered (2–4(–6). Sandy woods and river bottoms; e
TX w to West Cross Timbers. Sep–Nov.

Eragrostis hypnoides (Lam.) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (like Hypnum—a genus of mosses,
moss-like), TEAL LOVE GRASS, SMOOTH CREEPING LOVE GRASS. Annual; culms creeping, rooting at
nodes, mat-forming; in aspect similar to E. reptans; flowering culms 10–25 cm tall. Mud and
sand bars of streams, lakes; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly se and e TX; also Edwards Plateau.
Spring to fall, but mostly fall.

Eragrostis intermedia Hitchc., (intermediate), PLAINS LOVE GRASS. Tufted erect perennial 50–100
cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous except at top; panicles open; spikelets 5–11-flowered. Sandy woods
or less often open ground; mainly e 1/2 of TX, also Trans-Pecos. May–Oct. Many of the speci-
mens we put in E. intermedia have been previously placed in E. lugens (Correll & Johnston
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1271




 Elymus canadensis [HI1]            Elymus virginicus [USB]                           Eragrostis barrelieri [GO2]




Eragrostis cilianensis [HI1]   Eragrostis curtipedicellata [USB]                           Eragrostis curvula [USD]




 Eragrostis hirsuta [HI1]                                     Eragrostis hypnoides [GO2]
1272 POACEAE/ERAGROSTIS

1970). We are following Gould (1975b) and Hatch et al. (1990) in recognizing E. lugens as re-
stricted to vegetational areas 1, 2, 6, and 7 (Fig. 2) in TX.

Eragrostis pectinacea (Michx.) Nees ex Steud., (comb-like). Low-spreading to erect annual 10–60
cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous except at top; lemmas grayish green. Sandy or clayey roadsides,
disturbed areas. Spring–Nov.

1. Pedicels not appressed, 3–10 mm long, averaging > 4 mm                               var. miserrima
1. Pedicels appressed, flexuous, 1–5 mm long, usually averaging < 4 mm                 var. pectinacea

var. miserrima (E. Fourn.) Reeder, (possibly from Latin: miser, miserable, sickly, or wretched).
The characters used to distinguish the varieties given here follow Correll and Johnston (1970),
who recognized the taxa at the specific level; however, the distinctions seem weak. Specimens
from Grayson, Jack, and Limestone cos. may be examples of var. miserrima; scattered in TX. [E.
arida Hitchc., E. tephrosanthos Schult.]

var. pectinacea. SPREADING LOVE GRASS. Bell, Dallas, Denton, Erath, Hamilton, Mills, and
Montague cos.; widespread in TX. This is by far the more common of the 2 varieties in nc TX. [E.
diffusa Buckley]

Eragrostis pilosa (L.) P. Beauv., (pilose, with long soft hairs), INDIA LOVE GRASS. Tufted annual 15–
45 cm tall; closed spikelets (before lemmas spread open) very narrow, 1 mm wide or less, when
open to 1(–1.3) mm wide; lemmas grayish green with reddish or purplish tips. Sandy or sandy
clay roadsides, disturbed sites; e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also s TX and Panhandle. Jun–
Aug. Native of Europe and Asia. I

Eragrostis reptans (Michx.) Nees, (creeping), CREEPING LOVE GRASS. Dioecious annual; culms
creeping, rooting at nodes, mat-forming; flowering culms 5–10(–20) cm tall; spikelets usually
0.8–2(–2.5) mm long, with 16–40(–60) florets, crowded, sessile or short-pedicelled, ovate to lan-
ceolate or linear, sometimes curved. Dry lake beds, stream bottoms, weedy areas; Bell, Cooke,
Dallas, Denton, Grayson, and Kaufman cos.; e 1/2 of TX. Apr–Nov. Sometimes segregated into
the genus Neeragrostis [as N. reptans (Michx.) Nicora].

Eragrostis secundiflora J. Presl. subsp. oxylepis (Torr.) S.D. Koch, (sp.: with flowers on one side of
the stalk; subsp.: sharp-scaled), RED LOVE GRASS. Tufted perennial 15–90 cm tall; leaf sheaths
glabrous except at top; ligules very short, with membranous base half the total length, ob-
scured by long hairs at base of leaf blade; panicles usually small and compact, occasionally
with 1 or 2 long branches; spikelets glaucous or blue-gray to green, or brown-red. Sandy woods
or open ground, rarely in limestone gravel; Grayson Co. w through West Cross Timbers; nearly
throughout TX, but more common in the e 1/2. May–Nov. Koch (1978) indicated that subsp.
secundiflora occurs from South America n to Mexico. We are following Koch (1978) for syn-
onymy of this taxon. [E. beyrichii J.G. Sm., E. oxylepis (Torr.) Torr., E. oxylepis (Torr.) Torr. var.
beyrichii (J.G. Sm.) Shinners]

Eragrostis sessilispica Buckley, (with sessile spikelets), TUMBLE LOVE GRASS. Tufted perennial
30–90 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous except at top; panicles becoming loosely coiled and half
prostrate, ultimately breaking off and acting as tumbleweeds. Sandy prairies and oak openings;
East Cross Timbers w to Panhandle, also s TX. Apr–Sep.

Eragrostis spectabilis (Pursh) Steud., (spectacular), PURPLE LOVE GRASS. Perennial with a knotty,
rhizomatous base; leaf sheaths usually pilose on collar and upper margins; panicles open, the
branches capillary, wiry. Sandy or disturbed sites; widespread in TX, but mainly e 1/2. Aug–Oct.

Eragrostis superba Peyr., (superb), WILMANN’S LOVE GRASS. Perennial; spikelets 3–10 mm wide,
conspicuously compressed, showy; lemmas keeled. Drought resistant species planted as a range
                                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1273




                                                     Eragrostis intermedia [HI1]




Eragrostis pectinacea var. miserrima [HI1]   Eragrostis pectinacea var. pectinacea [USB]             Eragrostis pilosa [USB]




                                                 么




                                                              么                               乆

                                                乆
                                                         Eragrostis reptans [HI1]
1274 POACEAE/ERIOCHLOA

grass, persists, and escapes; Parker Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.), cited for vegetational area 5 by
Hignight et al. (1988) and vegetational areas 4, 5, 6, and 7 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990). Intro-
duced from Africa. I

Eragrostis trichodes (Nutt.) A.W. Wood, (hair-like), SAND LOVE GRASS. Tufted perennial; leaf
sheaths pilose at throat, sometimes villous on back or papillose-villous on margins; lemmas
with reddish-tinged splotches. Sandy prairies; widespread in TX. Jul–Dec., sporadically in the
spring. [E. pilifera Scheele, E. trichodes var. pilifera (Scheele) Fernald] We have not been able to
find consistent differences and are thus following Correll and Johnston (1970), Gould (1975b),
and S. Hatch (pers. comm.) in lumping var. pilifera.

                                       ERIOCHLOA CUP GRASS
Annuals or perennials; ligule of hairs to 1–2 mm long; panicles slender, of erect, spike-like
racemes; spikelets with a cup-like collar or ring just under the base (representing the much-re-
duced lower glume), 2-flowered, the lower staminate or neuter, the upper perfect; upper glume
and sterile lemma similar.
AA genus of ca. 30 species of tropical and warm areas of the world. (Greek: erion, wool, and
chloë, grass) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Shaw & Webster 1987; Crins 1991.

1. Pedicels densely short-pubescent; racemes overlapping each other; lemma of perfect floret
   with an awn 0.5–0.8 mm long; plants annual                                                        E. contracta
1. Pedicels with silky hairs more than half as long as the spikelets; racemes not or only scarcely
   overlapping each other; lemma of perfect floret awnless or with a minute awn tip less than 0.5
   mm long; plants perennial                                                                           E. sericea

Eriochloa contracta Hitchc., (contracted), PRAIRIE CUP GRASS. Plant 15–75 cm tall, often with
many culms, forming bushy clumps, rather densely soft-pubescent. Dry roadsides, disturbed
areas; nearly throughout TX. May–Oct.

Eriochloa sericea (Scheele) Munro ex Vasey, (silky), TEXAS CUP GRASS, SILKY CUP GRASS. Plant
tufted, 30–100 cm tall, rather densely soft-pubescent. Prairies or open thickets, calcareous clays;
nc TX w to Rolling Plains and s to Edwards Plateau. May–Oct. Secondary member of original
prairie; it does not withstand grazing.

                       ERIONEURON WOOLLY GRASS, FLUFF GRASS
AA New World genus of 3 species (Valdés-Reyna & Hatch 1997); similar to and previously
lumped with Tridens. (Greek: erion, wool, and neuro, nerve, from hairs on nerves of lemmas
and paleas) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCES: Valdés-Reyna 1985; Valdés-Reyna & Hatch 1997; Peterson et al. 1997.

Erioneuron pilosum (Buckley) Nash, (pilose, with long soft hairs), HAIRY TRIDENS, HAIRY
ERIONEURON. Tufted perennial; culms 10–30 cm tall, usually with one node above the basal
cluster of leaves; ligule of hairs ca. 0.5 mm long; leaf blades 1–2 mm broad, 2–8(–11) cm long,
with a thick white margin (visible with a lens); panicles or racemes contracted, 2–4 cm long,
1.5–2 cm broad, of ca. 4–12 large spikelets; spikelets usually 10–16 mm long, with 7–18 closely
imbricated florets; glumes 1-nerved, glabrous; lemmas rounded on back, 3-nerved, the nerves
and margins conspicuously long-hairy, with awn 1–2 mm long from entire or notched apex.
Disturbed sites, prairies; Bell, Dallas, and Grayson cos.; also Parker (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.) and
Tarrant (Mahler 1988) cos.; nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr–Oct. [Tridens pilosus (Buckley) Hitchc.]
                                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1275




Eragrostis secundiflora subsp. oxylepis [USB]   Eragrostis sessilispica [USB]                    Eragrostis spectabilis [HI1]




          Eragrostis superba [HIG]              Eragrostis trichodes [USB]                       Eriochloa contracta [GO1]




           Eriochloa sericea [USB]                  Erioneuron pilosum [BB2]                             Eustachys retusa [HEA]
1276 POACEAE/EUSTACHYS

                                            EUSTACHYS
AA genus of 10 species native to tropical America and Africa. Eustachys has sometimes been
treated as a section of Chloris. (Greek: eu, good, and stachys, spike, possibly in reference to the
spike-like inflorescence branches) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCE: McKenzie et al. 1987.

Eustachys retusa (Lag.) Kunth, (retuse, notched slightly at apex). Tufted perennial with erect
culms 25–90 cm tall; ligule a membrane ca. 0.5 mm long; leaf blades 4–7(–10) mm wide; inflo-
rescences of 3–14 digitately arranged, spike-like branches 4–9 cm long; spikelets crowded, in 2
rows along 1 side of the branches, with 1 perfect lower floret and usually 1 sterile (sometimes
staminate) floret above; fertile lemma with margins strongly ciliate; sterile lemma cylindrical
to narrowly obtriangular and truncate. Disturbed roadsides; Falls and Limestone cos.; Hatch et
al. (1990) only cited vegetational areas 3 and 4 (Fig. 2). May–Sep. Native to South America.
[Chloris argentina (Hack.) Lillo & Parodi] I

                                        FESTUCA FESCUE
Tufted perennials; leaf blades 2.5–12 mm wide; leaf sheaths open; ligule a membrane; panicles
open or contracted; spikelets with 2–8 florets; lemmas not toothed at apex, awned or awnless,
the backs rounded, not plainly nerved except at apex.
AA genus of 450 species of temperate areas and tropical mountains; some are important as
pasture and lawn grasses. Vulpia (SIXWEEKS GRASS, ANNUAL FESCUE), treated here as a separate
genus, has in the past sometimes been included in Festuca. Darbyshire (1993) recently sug-
gested that Festuca subgenus Schedonorus, including F. arundinacea, be shifted to the related
genus Lolium. (Ancient Latin name of some grass) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)
REFERENCES: Piper 1906; Aiken & Lefkovitch 1993; Darbyshire & Warwick 1992; Darbyshire
1993.

1. Lower lemmas 5–9 mm long; spikelets 8–20 mm long; panicles contacted, at least above
                                                                                        F. arundinacea
1. Lower lemmas 3–4.7 mm long; spikelets 4–8 mm long; panicles open                  F. subverticillata

Festuca arundinacea Schreb., (reed-like), TALL FESCUE, ALTA FESCUE. Nearly glabrous perennial
60–120(–200) cm tall, forming clumps; panicles rather narrow and dense; spikelets 5–8-flow-
ered; lemmas usually awnless (or with short awn). In calcareous clay, roadsides, disturbed areas;
also cultivated; Grayson, Kaufman, and Rockwall cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994), also ob-
served (R. O’Kennon) in Hunt, Johnson, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; spreading rapidly and prob-
ably in numerous nc TX cos.; widespread in TX. Mostly Apr–Jun. Native of Europe. [F. elatior L.
var. arundinacea (Schreb.) Wimm., Lolium arundinaceum (Schreb.) Darbysh.] This species can
be a problematic invasive weed in native prairie remnants. There are reports of livestock being
poisoned (fescue foot or gangrenous fescue poisoning) from eating this species; the symptons
are similar to those produced by ingestion of ergot alkaloids and fungi infecting the plant may
be at fault (Kingsbury 1964; Hardin & Brownie 1993). Darbyshire (1993) presented evidence
that Festuca is polyphyletic and that this species is best treated in the genus Lolium; however,
we are treating it conservatively and for now continuing to recognize it in Festuca. Jones et al.
(1997) placed it in Lolium.  I

Festuca subverticillata (Pers.) E.B. Alexeev, (slightly whorled), NODDING FESCUE. Glabrous peren-
nial 50–120 cm tall, forming clumps; panicles open, with drooping branches; spikelets 2–5(–6)-
flowered; lemmas glabrous, awnless, falling early. Low woods and thickets; Grayson Co.; also
Dallas Co. (Mahler, 1988); mainly e TX. Apr–Jun. [F. obtusa Biehler]
                                                                                        GLYCERIA/POACEAE 1277

                                     GLYCERIA MANNA GRASS
Perennials, often with rhizomes or rooting at lower nodes; ligule a membrane; inflorescence an
open or contracted panicle (rarely a raceme); spikelets in ours with 3–14(–20) florets, awnless,
disarticulating above glumes and between florets; lemmas usually with 7 strong, parallel
nerves, rounded on back.
AA temperate, but especially North American genus of 40 species; some are good pasture
grasses; Native Americans formerly used the fruits of some. (Greek: glyceros, sweet, referring to
the taste of the seeds of one species) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Meliceae)

1. Inflorescence branches usually short and stiffly erect or ascending; spikelets 8–30 mm long,
   with 7–14(–20) florets; first glume 2–3 mm long                                                   G. arkansana
1. Inflorescence branches (at least lower) long and flexuous; spikelets 5 mm or less long, usually
   with 3–7 florets; first glume < 1 mm long                                                            G. striata

Glyceria arkansana Fernald, (of Arkansas), ARKANSAS MANNA GRASS. Plant glabrous; culms ca.
1–1.8 m tall, often rooting near base; ligules ca. 3–6 mm long; inflorescences usually 18–40(–50)
cm long, the panicle branches short and rigid; lemmas 2.5–3.5 mm long, hirsute or hirtellous.
Wet areas; Fannin Co. in Red River drainage (Talbot property), also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994);
mainly e TX. Mar–May. According to Gould (1975b), G. arkansana “is close to and weakly differ-
entiated from G. septentrionalis Hitchc. (EASTERN MANNA GRASS) and probably should be
treated as a variety of that species.” Jones et al (1997) treated it as a variety of G. septentrionalis,
while J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) recognizes it at the species level. Glyceria septentrionalis
Hitchc., also known from e TX, differs in having longer (3.5–5 mm), scabrous lemmas. [G.
septentrionalis Hitchc. var. arkansana (Fernald) Steyerm. & Kucera]

Glyceria striata (Lam.) Hitchc., (striated, striped), FOWL MANNA GRASS, NERVED MANNA GRASS.
Plant glabrous, often with short rhizomes; culms 0.4–0.9 m tall; ligules 1.5–4 mm long; inflores-
cence a panicle 10–22 cm long with numerous slender, flexuous branches bare of spikelets on
the lower 1/3–1/2; spikelets ca. 3–4(–5) mm long; lemmas usually 1.5–2 mm long. Along
streams, moist forest margins; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994) in Red River drainage, also Bell Co. (Fort
Hood—Sanchez 1997); rare in Trans-Pecos, Edwards Plateau, and e TX. Apr–Aug. Reported as
potentially cyanogenic (Burlage 1968). 



                                             GYMNOPOGON
AA genus of ca. 15 species of warm areas of the Americas and from India to Thailand. (Greek:
gymnus, naked, and pogon, beard, referring to the reduction of the abortive flower to a bare awn)
(subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCE: Smith 1971.

Gymnopogon ambiguus (Michx.) Britton, Sterns, & Poggenb., (ambiguous), BEARDED SKELETON
GRASS. Perennial from short rhizome; culms 25–60 cm long with numerous short overlapping
leaves with spreading to deflexed blades to 13 mm wide; ligules minute, membranous or a rim
of callus tissue; panicles usually broader than long, 10–25 cm long, with 12–35 widely spread-
ing, spike-like branches; branches usually 10–20 cm long with spikelets to base or bare on
basal 2–5 cm; spikelets usually not overlapping, appressed, in 2 rows on 1 side of the slender,
slightly flattened branch, with 1 perfect lower floret and 1 rudimentary upper floret; glumes 3–
7 mm long; lemmas shorter than the glumes, with a 4–8(–11) mm awn from the minutely
notched apex. Usually in sandy soils, typically in shade; Grayson, Hunt, and Montague cos.;
also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly e TX. Late Aug–Nov.
1278 POACEAE/HILARIA

                                                 HILARIA
AA genus of 10 species ranging from the s U.S. to Guatemala. (Named for A. Saint-Hilaire,
1779–1853, French botanist) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCES: Cory 1948b; Brown & Coe 1951.

Hilaria belangeri (Steud.) Nash, (named for Charles Paulus Bélanger, 1805–1881), COMMON CURLY-
MESQUITE. Low tufted perennial, 10–30 cm tall, sending out slender stolons that produce new
tufts; nodes densely bearded with spreading hairs; ligule a membrane 0.5–1 mm long; leaf
blades 1–2(–3) mm wide, short and often forming a curly tuft, but sometimes longer and erect;
inflorescence a slender spike 2–3.5 cm long, exerted on peduncles, with 4–8 clusters of 3 spike-
lets each; spikelet clusters usually 4.5–6 mm long; central spikelet fertile, 1-flowered, lateral
spikelets staminate, 2-flowered; glumes united below, usually asymmetrical; glumes of central
spikelet with awns usually 2.5–5 mm long. Open brushy and rocky areas, usually on calcareous
soils; Bell, Brown, and Stephens cos.; nc TX s and w to w TX. (Mar–)Aug–Oct(–Nov).

                                         HORDEUM BARLEY
Annuals (in nc TX); leaves with or without auricles; ligule a membrane; inflorescence a dense,
2-sided spike or spike-like raceme, breaking apart in age except in H. vulgare; spikelets 3 per
node, each 1-flowered (or lateral spikelets may be reduced to a group of awns), the central
spikelet sessile, usually perfect, the 2 lateral spikelets usually short-pedicelled, staminate or
sterile (perfect in H. vulgare); lemmas usually awned apically.
AA n temperate genus of ca. 20 species including H. vulgare (cultivated BARLEY). BARLEY is a
very old cereal crop originally grown by people of the ancient Near East and is considered
along with WHEAT to be one of the oldest cultivated plants; it is currently used primarily in the
malting process of beer- and whiskey-making and as animal feed (Heiser 1990a). The awns of
some species are minutely barbed and cause physical damage and infection in livestock
(Stephens 1980). (Ancient Latin name for BARLEY) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Triticeae)
REFERENCES: Covas 1949; Bowden 1959b; Dewey 1982; Estes & Tyrl 1982; Baum & Bailey 1986,
1989, 1990; von Bothmer et al. 1991; Zohary & Hopf 1994.

1. Lemmas of lateral spikelets absent or much smaller than lemma of central spikelet; lemma
   awns 2–10(–15) mm long; leaf sheaths without auricles at summit                                 H. pusillum
1. Lemmas of lateral spikelets as large as lemma of central spikelet; lemma awns 10 mm or more
   long (usually much longer); leaf sheaths with auricles at summit.
   2. Leaf blades 1–6 mm wide; lemmas 1.3–1.9 mm wide across back; lateral spikelets short-pedi-
      celled; glumes of central spikelet ciliate marginally                                        H. murinum
   2. Leaf blades mostly 7–18 mm wide; lemmas 2–3 mm wide across back; lateral spikelets
      sessile; glumes of central spikelet glabrous or scabrous                                      H. vulgare

Hordeum murinum L. subsp. leporinum (Link) Arcang., (sp.: mouse-gray; subsp.: hare-like), HARE
BARLEY. Annual 30–75 cm tall; culms erect or decumbent basally; leaf sheaths glabrous; glumes
ciliate marginally; lemma awns 10–35 mm long. Disturbed sites; Dallas, Coleman, and
Williamson cos.; throughout TX except extreme e and s. Apr. Native of Europe. [H. leporinum
Link] The awns can cause mechanical injury to grazing livestock (Burlage 1968). I

Hordeum pusillum Nutt., (very small), LITTLE BARLEY, MOUSE BARLEY. Annual 12–60 cm tall;
culms erect or with bent or decumbent base; leaf sheaths glabrous; spikes flattened; glumes
scabrous, not ciliate; lemma awns 2–10(–15) mm long. Disturbed sites; throughout TX. Apr–May.

Hordeum vulgare L., (common), BARLEY. Glabrous annual; vegetatively resembling WHEAT and
RYE; axis of spike remaining intact (vs. abscising at each node in our other species); lemma awns
                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1279




       Festuca arundinacea [USB]            Festuca subverticillata [GO2]                    Glyceria arkansana [HI1]




          Glyceria striata [HI1]         Gymnopogon ambiguus [USB]                            Hilaria belangeri [HI1]




Hordeum murinum subsp. leporinum [MAR]         Hordeum pusillum [REE]                         Hordeum vulgare [HI1]
1280 POACEAE/KOELERIA

long, up to 150 mm. Cultivated throughout much of TX and occasionally occuring as a transi-
tory waif along roadsides, railroads, and field margins; Denton Co., also Tarrant Co. (R.
O’Kennon, pers. obs.). Apr–May. Like its wild ancestor, H. vulgare subsp. spontaneum (C. Koch)
Thell., BARLEY native to Eurasia (Zohary & Hopf 1994). BARLEY is considered one of the two old-
est cultivated plants (WHEAT—Triticum aestivum, is the other); as such it was probably impor-
tant in the development of early civilization in the Near East (Heiser 1990a); BARLEY is able to
stand drier, less fertile, and more saline conditions than WHEAT. It is the main cereal used in Old
World beer production (Zohary & Hopf 1994). I

                                                 KOELERIA
AA temperate genus of ca. 35 species. (Named for Georg Ludwig Koeler, 1765–1807, professor
at Mainz and student of grasses) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)
REFERENCE: Arnow 1994.

Koeleria macrantha (Ledeb.) Schult., (large-flowered), JUNE GRASS, PRAIRIE JUNE GRASS. Perennial
35–75 cm tall, forming small clumps; leaves mostly crowded toward base, the lowest with finely
pubescent sheaths, the upper glabrous; ligule a short membrane 0.5–1(–2) mm long; inflores-
cence a narrow panicle, dense, spike-like, with puberulent axis; spikelets shiny, mostly 2–4-
flowered, 4–5 mm long, disarticulating above glumes; lemmas usually acute or minutely apicu-
late. Grasslands; Delta, Denton, Grayson, and Kaufman cos., also Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988);
mainly w 1/2 of TX. May–Jun. [K. cristata of authors in part, not Pers., K. pyramidata of authors
in part, not (Lam.) P. Beauv.]

                                          LEERSIA CUT GRASS
Rhizomatous perennials (our taxa); ligule a membrane; spikelets 1-flowered, sessile or
subsessile, secund along the distal portions of the branchlets of the inflorescence, compressed
laterally, disarticulating from pedicel; glumes absent (the spikelets thus consisting solely of na-
ked florets); lemmas oblong to elliptic, with nerves and keel hispid-ciliate.
AA genus of 17 species native to tropical and warm temperate areas; typically marsh grasses
sometimes used as fodder; related to Oryza sativa L. (RICE), an annual with spikelets 7–10 mm
long (vs < 6 mm long in Leersia). In se and e TX, RICE is cultivated and is occasionally a weed in
moist soils; this native of se Asia is one of the world’s most important food crops. While less
widely distributed than WHEAT, RICE feeds more people, being the basic food for more than half
the world’s human population (Heiser 1990a). (Named for Johann Leers, 1727–1774, a German
botanist) (subfamily Oryzoideae, tribe Oryzeae)
REFERENCE: Pyrah 1969.

1. Spikelets 3–4 mm wide, nearly as wide as long; leaf blades 5–15(–20) mm wide; in nc TX known
   only from Lamar Co. in Red River drainage                                                       L. lenticularis
1. Spikelets 2 mm or less wide, 2–3 times as long as wide; leaf blades 3–10 mm wide; widespread in
   nc TX.
   2. Lower panicle branches fascicled; spikelets 4–5.5 mm long, 1.5–2 mm wide                      L. oryzoides
   2. Lower panicle branches solitary; spikelets 2.2–3(–3.5) mm long, 1 mm wide                        L. virginica

Leersia lenticularis Michx., (lens-shaped), CATCHFLY GRASS. Culms 0.9–1.5 m long, erect or
sprawling and ascending; panicles open, with spikelets clustered towards ends of flexuous, of-
ten drooping branches, the branches naked nearly 1/2 their length; spikelets broadly oblong,
slightly asymmetrical, mostly 4–5 mm long; keel and nerves of lemmas with conspicuous, stiff
hairs giving the appearance of widely spaced comb teeth (use lens). Wet or moist areas along
streams and lakes; Lamar Co. at edge of oxbow lake in Red River drainage; mainly se and e TX.
Mostly Jul–Nov.
                                                                                     LEPTOCHLOA/POACEAE 1281

Leersia oryzoides (L.) Sw., (like rice—Oryza), RICE CUT GRASS. Plant 1–1.5 m tall; rhizomes slender,
creeping; leaf blades 7–10 mm wide; panicle branches usually numerous, naked of spikelets for
< 1/2 their length. Marshes, wet places; Bell, Dallas, Grayson, and Limestone cos., also Lamar Co.
(Carr 1994); throughout most of TX. Sep–Nov.

Leersia virginica Willd., (of Virginia), WHITE GRASS, VIRGINIA CUT GRASS. Plant 0.5–1.2 m tall; rhi-
zomes scaly, clustered, stouter than culm base; leaf blades 3–8 mm wide; panicle branches few,
widely spaced, long and slender, up to 8–12 cm long, naked for > 1/2 their length. Ditches, moist
areas; Collin, Dallas, Grayson, and Rockwall cos., also Bell (Fort Hood—Sanchez 1997), Fannin
(Mahler 1988), and Lamar (Carr 1994) cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX. May–Nov.

                                   LEPTOCHLOA SPRANGLETOP
Annuals or perennials; inflorescence a panicle of spicate branches; spikelets with 2–12 flowers,
the lower 1–2 perfect, the rest staminate or neutral, sessile or nearly so, overlapping in 2 rows on
1 side of a nearly terete branch, disarticulating above the glumes and between florets; lemmas
in ours awnless or with a short awn to 1.5 mm long.
AA genus of 27 species native to tropical and warm areas of the Americas and Australia; some
are used as fodder. (Greek: leptos, slender, and chloa, grass, from the slender inflorescence
branches) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCES: Snow & Davidse 1993; Snow 1996; Peterson et al. 1997.

1. Lemmas 1–1.5 mm long; leaf sheaths usually papillose-pilose; spikelets 1.4–3 mm long, with 2–4
   florets                                                                                           L. mucronata
1. Lemmas at least 1.8 mm long; leaf sheaths glabrous to pilose, not papillose; spikelets usually 5–
   10 mm long, with 3–12 florets.
   2. Tip of lemma appearing chopped off, usually notched, awnless; plants perennial                       L. dubia
   2. Tip of lemma not appearing chopped off, blunt to acute or acuminate (but can be slightly
      notched), awnless or with an awn 0.5–1.5 mm long; plants annual.
      3. Second glume 3–4.2 mm long; inflorescence branches 4–12(–19) cm long; lemmas
         lance-elliptic, acute to acuminate, 2.5–4 mm long, usually with awn 0.5–1.5 mm long
                                                                                                     L. fascicularis
      3. Second glume < 3 mm long; inflorescence branches 3–6 cm long; lemmas obovate,
         blunt, 1.8–3 mm long, awnless or abruptly mucronate                                            L. uninerva

Leptochloa dubia (Kunth) Nees, (doubtful), GREEN SPRANGLETOP, TEXAS CROWFOOT. Tufted pe-
rennial 25–115 cm tall, erect, unbranched above base (but inflorescences with 2–15 unbranched
flexuous, loosely erect or spreading main branches); ligule a dense row of cilia 0.3–1.2 mm long;
spikelets usually with 3–8 florets; glumes and lemmas awnless. Rocky slopes, loams; Bell,
Johnson, Palo Pinto, Shackelford, and Tarrant cos.; widespread in TX. Spring–fall.

Leptochloa fascicularis (Lam.) A. Gray, (fascicled, clustered), BEARDED SPRANGLETOP, SALT
MEADOW GRASS, SALT SPRANGLETOP . Tufted annual usually 50–100 cm tall, moderately
branched; ligule a well-developed membrane 2.5–6 mm long; inflorescences with ca. 8–35
stiffly erect or erect-spreading branches; spikelets with 6–12 florets; lemmas with central nerve
usually projecting as an awn 0.5–1.5 mm long. Mud, sometimes alkaline or subsaline; Dallas and
Grayson cos.; throughout TX. Summer–fall.

Leptochloa mucronata (Michx.) Kunth, (mucronate, with a short and small abrupt tip), RED
SPRANGLETOP, SLENDER GRASS. Tufted annual 10–80 cm tall; inflorescence branches few to nu-
merous (to ca. 70), scattered, slender, flexuous; spikelets widely spaced and only slightly over-
lapping, with 2–4 florets; glumes and lemmas usually awnless. Moist soils and mud; nearly
throughout TX. Late spring–fall. [L. filiformis (Lam.) P. Beauv.]
1282 POACEAE/LIMNODEA

Leptochloa uninerva (J. Presl) Hitchc. & Chase, (one-nerved), MEXICAN SPRANGLETOP. Similar to
L. fascicularis; spikelets more darkly colored at maturity. Mud, sometimes alkaline or subsaline;
included based on citation for vegetational area 5 by Hignight et al. (1988); mainly s TX n to
Edwards Plateau. Spring–summer(–fall).

                                      LIMNODEA OZARK GRASS
AA monotypic genus of the s United States. (Name altered from Limnas, an Old World genus
of grasses) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)

Limnodea arkansana (Nutt.) L.H. Dewey, (of Arkansas), OZARK GRASS. Annual 15–60(–100) cm
tall; leaf blades glabrous or more often hispidulous or hispid on upper and lower surfaces;
ligule a lacerate-ciliate membrane 1–2 mm long; inflorescence a narrow but not cylindrical
panicle, erect or nodding at tip; spikelets 1-flowered, 3–4 mm long excluding awns; lemmas
usually slightly 2-toothed at apex, awned from back at or near base of the 2 teeth, the awn (4–)
8–12 mm long, geniculate. Prairies and disturbed areas, calcareous soils, often in sand; through-
out most of TX except extreme w and nw. Mar–Jun.

                                            LOLIUM RYE GRASS
Annuals or perennials; leaves auricled; ligule a membrane; inflorescence an unbranched spike
with sessile spikelets in 2 ranks on opposite sides of the inflorescence axis; inflorescence axis
remaining intact, disarticulation occuring above glume and between florets; spikelets 1 per
node, placed with edge (keels of lemmas) against axis of inflorescence, without a glume on that
side, 5–15(–20)-flowered.
AAn Eurasian genus of 8 species including valuable fodder and lawn grasses. Darbyshire
(1993) suggested that Festuca subgenus Schedonorus, including F. arundinacea, be shifted to
Lolium. (Ancient Latin name for rye grass) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)
REFERENCE: Darbyshire 1993.

1. Glumes markedly shorter than spikelet, 5–10 mm long                                                     L. perenne
1. Glumes as long as the entire spikelet (excluding awns), 10–20 mm long                              L. temulentum

Lolium perenne L., (perennial), Annual or short-lived perennial. Cultivated for winter-green
lawns and erosion control; escaped to roadsides, disturbed areas; throughout TX. Mar–Jun. Na-
tive of Europe. While we are following Kartesz (1994) in recognizing the following 2 subspecies,
there appears to be significant intergradation and variation. According to Gould (1975b), “… rec-
ognition of two varieties [subspecies] is not satisfactory.” Awned and unawned individuals can
be found together. I

1. Leaf auricles long, slender, pointed; lemmas usually all awned, rarely all awnless, occasionally only
   a few in upper spikelets awned                                                                    subsp. multiflorum
1. Leaf auricles mostly short, rounded; lemmas awnless                                                   subsp. perenne

subsp. multiflorum (Lam.) Husn., (many-flowered), ITALIAN RYE GRASS. More common in culti-
vation than subspecies perenne. Coryell, Ellis, Grayson, Hill, McLennan, and Navarro cos. [L.
multiflorum Lam., L. perenne var. italicum sensu Mahler, possibly (A. Braun) D.R. Parnell, L.
perenne var. multiflorum (Lam.) D.R. Parnell] Jones et al. (1997) treated this taxon as L. perenne
var. aristatum Willd. I

subsp. perenne. PERENNIAL RYE GRASS. Perennial but grown as winter annual. Hill and Grayson
cos. I

Lolium temulentum L., (drunken), DARNEL, DARNEL RYE GRASS, BEARDLESS DARNEL RYE GRASS, POI-
SON DARNEL. Annual. Roadsides, sandy weedy areas; Grayson, Lamar, and McLennan cos., also
                                                           ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1283




Koeleria macrantha [HI1]      Leersia lenticularis [USB]                    Leersia oryzoides [MAS]




  Leersia virginica [HI1]     Leptochloa dubia [USB]                       Leptochloa fascicularis [USB]




Leptochloa mucronata [HI1]   Leptochloa uninerva [USB]                       Limnodea arkansana [USB]
1284 POACEAE/MELICA

Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); throughout much of TX. May–Jun. Native of
Eurasia. [L. temulentum var. leptochaeton A. Braun] Poisonous due to alkaloids produced by
fungi infecting grains; livestock can be affected with symptoms including “rye-grass staggers”
in sheep; infected grains were formerly used to make an intoxicating beverage (Muenscher 1951;
Mabberley 1987; Hardin & Brownie 1993).  I

                                   MELICA MELIC, MELIC GRASS
Tall perennials; leaf sheaths closed; ligule a membrane; inflorescence a panicle; spikelets usu-
ally with (1–)2–3 perfect florets, also usually 2–3 neuter reduced florets (“rudiments”) above;
glumes broad; lemmas (in our species) awnless; disarticulation below spikelets (in our species).
AA genus of 80 species of temperate regions excluding Australia. (Greek: meli, honey, or classi-
cal name for some plant, possibly with sweet sap, taken up by Linnaeus for this genus) (subfam-
ily Pooideae, tribe Meliceae)
REFERENCE: Boyle 1945.

1. Panicles usually simple (rarely compound); glumes ca. equal in length or second slightly longer;
   spikelets ± flat-topped and triangular in shape; ligules 1 mm or less long; rudiments broadly
   obovate to obconic, truncate (appearing abruptly cut off )                                         M. mutica
1. Panicles usually compound (branches themselves branched); glumes not equal in length; spike-
   lets neither flat-topped nor triangular in shape; ligules 3–6 mm long; rudiments narrowly obo-
   vate or oblong, not truncate                                                                       M. nitens

Melica mutica Walter, (pointless), TWO-FLOWER MELIC, NARROW MELIC. Culms usually 40–80(–
100) cm tall from creeping rhizomes; inflorescences 4–16 cm long; spikelets 7–11 mm long; fer-
tile florets usually 2; rudiments broadly obovate to obconic (= like an inverted cone), spreading
at an angle from the rachilla. Forest openings on sandy soils; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994) in Red
River drainage; mainly se and e TX. Apr–Jun.

Melica nitens (Scribn.) Nutt. ex Piper, (shining), THREE-FLOWER MELIC, TALL MELIC. Rhizomatous,
50–120 cm tall; inflorescences usually 10–26 mm long; spikelets 8–15 mm long, much longer
than broad; fertile florets usually 2–3; rudiments not spreading at an angle from the rachilla.
Woodland, rocky grasslands; Grayson Co.; also Coleman Co. (Mahler 1988); mainly w 1/2 of TX.
Apr–Jun.

                                               MISCANTHUS
AA genus of ca. 20 species of the Old World tropics, s Africa, and e Asia; some are cultivated as
ornamentals. (Greek: mischos, pedicel, and anthos, flower, from stalked spikelets) (subfamily
Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)

Miscanthus sinensis Andersson, (Chinese), SILVER GRASS, EULALIA. Perennial ca. 1–3(–more) m
tall, forming dense, bushy clumps; leaves basal and distributed up the culm, the blades to ca. 1
m long and 2 cm wide, green or variegated (with green and white or yellow bands or stripes) in
some cultivated forms, the margins sharply scaberulous; ligule a ciliate membrane 1.5–3 mm
long; inflorescence a dense panicle 10–35 cm long, 5–20 cm wide, the branches ascending; in-
florescence branches not disarticulating, the spikelets falling from pedicels at maturity; spike-
lets in pairs, both spikelets of each pair alike, except 1 short-pedicelled, 1 long-pedicelled;
pedicels 1–5 mm long; spikelets 4–5.5 mm long, with a tuft of long hairs at base of glumes
slightly longer than spikelet; lemmas shorter than glumes, with a twisted, geniculate awn 5–10
mm long. No escaped nc TX specimens have been seen, but this species is cultivated, persists,
and possibly escapes. Fall. Native of e Asia. I
                                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1285




                                                   Lolium perenne subsp. perenne [USB]




                                                                                                  Lolium temulentum [USB]




Lolium perenne subsp. multiflorum [USD]



                                                         Melica mutica [USB]




                                                                                                  Miscanthus sinensis [HI1]




                                   Melica nitens [HI1]
1286 POACEAE/MUHLENBERGIA

                                       MUHLENBERGIA MUHLY
Ours perennials; ligule a membrane; inflorescences open to contracted; spikelets usually 1-
flowered, the floret separating above the glumes; glumes 1-nerved or nerveless, rarely 3–5-
nerved; lemmas 3(–5)-nerved, usually awned; paleas 2-nerved.
AA genus of ca. 160 species primarily of tropical and warm areas of the Americas, with a few
in s Asia. (Named for Gotthilf Henry Ernest Muhlenberg, 1753–1815, distinguished American
botanist of Pennsylvania) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCES: Scribner 1907; Soderstrom 1967; Pohl 1969; Morden & Hatch 1987, 1989, 1996;
Crosswhite & Crosswhite 1997; Peterson et al. 1997.

1. Panicles open, usually 2–17 cm or more wide; branches bare of spikelets for a distance from
  base.
  2. Leaf sheaths compressed-keeled; spikelets on pedicels usually 2–5(–8) mm long; lemma awns
     0.5–2 mm long; panicles with branches narrowly spreading, 2–5(–7) cm wide                          M. ⫻involuta
  2. Leaf sheaths rounded, not keeled; spikelets on pedicels 3–25 mm long, at least some usually
     10 mm or more long; lemma awns 0.5–13 mm long; panicles with branches usually widely
     spreading, 4–17(–20) cm wide.
     3. Awns of lemma usually 5–15 mm long (rarely as little as 2 mm); second (longer) glume < 1/2
       as long as lemmas                                                                                 M. capillaris
     3. Awns of lemma usually 0.5–4 mm long (rarely to 7 mm); second glume 1/2 as long as
       lemmas or longer                                                                                M. reverchonii
1. Panicles contracted, usually < 2(–3) cm wide; branches with spikelets nearly to base.
  4. Glumes minute, 0.3 mm or less long, the first often absent; culms decumbent, often rooting
     at lower nodes                                                                                      M. schreberi
  4. Glumes usually much longer; culms usually erect.
     5. Plants without scaly creeping rhizome; leaf sheaths sharply keeled; inflorescences (10–)20–
       54 cm long, usually 10–15(–30) mm wide; plants with unbranched erect culms, usually
       80–100(–150) cm tall                                                                            M. lindheimeri
     5. Plants with scaly creeping rhizome; leaf sheaths not sharply keeled; inflorescences variable
       in size, to 21 cm long and 10 mm wide, usually smaller; plants either with culms much
       branched above or not erect, to ca. 90 cm tall, usually much smaller.
       6. Mat-like plants of wet areas; leaf blades mostly 1–2(–3.5) cm long, 0.5–1(–2) mm wide;
          both glumes and lemmas 2 mm or less long                                                           M. utilis
       6. Plants not mat-like, of various habitats; leaf blades mostly 4 cm or more long, 1–3 (or
          more) mm wide; either glumes or lemmas or both > 2 mm long.
          7. Panicles terminal only; glumes narrowly lanceolate; lemmas pilose below, with con-
            spicuous awns 3–10(–18) mm long                                                              M. sylvatica
          7. Panicles terminal and axillary; glumes lanceolate to ovate; lemmas pilose to
            glabrous, awnless or with awns to 3 mm long (rarely to 7 mm in M. bushii).
            8. Culms glabrous.
               9. Glumes overlapping nearly to middle, ovate, abruptly tapering to an awn tip;
                 panicles long-exserted, the peduncles up to 11 cm long                                 M. sobolifera
               9. Glumes not overlapping or overlapping only at base, lanceolate, gradually taper-
                 ing to an awn tip; panicles not long-exserted, the peduncles only 1–2 cm long.
                 10. Glumes 2 mm or less long; ligules 0.6 mm or less long                                  M. bushii
                 10. Glumes 2–4 mm long; ligules 0.8–1.4 mm long                                         M. frondosa
                                                                      ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1287




  Muhlenbergia bushii [HI1]

                                      Muhlenbergia capillaris [HI1]                   Muhlenbergia frondosa [HI1]




   Muhlenbergia glabrifloris [SIL]



                                     Muhlenbergia ⫻involuta [HI1]                      Muhlenbergia lindheimeri [HI1]




Muhlenbergia mexicana [USB]                                    Muhlenbergia reverchonii [HI1]
1288 POACEAE/NASELLA

Muhlenbergia bushii R.W. Pohl, (for Benjamin Franklin Bush, 1858–1937, amateur botanist of
Missouri), NODDING MUHLY. Rhizomatous perennial; culms 30–90 cm tall, erect, becoming
much-branched above; panicles numerous, slender; lemma awnless or with awn rarely to 7
mm, pilose basally. Rich or low woods; Clay, Denton, Grayson, Hunt, McLennan, and Montague
cos., also Tarrant Co. (Silveus 1933); otherwise in TX only known from Van Zandt Co. in e TX.
Jul–Oct. [M. brachyphylla Bush]

Muhlenbergia capillaris (Lam.) Trin., (hair-like), HAIRY-AWN MUHLY, LONG-AWNED HAIR GRASS,
SLENDER MUHLY, GULF MUHLY. Densely tufted perennial; culms erect, 60–100 cm tall; panicles
open, diffuse, to 35(–40) cm long, 8–17(–20) cm wide, the branches and pedicels capillary and
widely spreading at maturity; lemmas 3.5–4.5(–5) mm long, minutely scabrous, with a few
hairs basally, with variable awn (2–)5–15 mm long. Sandy forest openings; Grayson, Henderson,
Lamar, and Tarrant cos.; mainly se and e TX. Sep–Oct.

Muhlenbergia frondosa (Poir.) Fernald, (leafy), WIRE-STEM MUHLY. Rhizomatous perennial; culms
often becoming decumbent or sprawling, to 100 cm long; panicles numerous, slender; lemmas
awnless or with awn to 2 mm long, pubescent basally. Clay soils; in TX known only from Dal-
las and Grayson cos. (Correll & Johnston 1970). Oct.

Muhlenbergia glabrifloris Scribn., (smooth-flowered), INLAND MUHLY. Rhizomatous perennial
similar to M. frondosa; panicles numerous, slender; lemmas awnless, glabrous. Rich woods, in
TX known only from the Blackland Prairie; type of this species was collected by Reverchon at
Dallas (Mahler 1988). Sep.

Muhlenbergia ⫻involuta Swallen [M. lindheimeri ⫻ M. reverchonii], (rolled inward), CANYON
MUHLY. Densely tufted perennial; culms stiffly erect, 60–140 cm tall; panicle branches slender,
erect-spreading; spikelets 3–4 mm long; lemmas 3–4 mm long, minutely bifid apically, with
awn 0.5–2 mm long from between the minute apical teeth. Prairie draws and openings; Burnet
Co.; type collected 20 mi ne of San Antonio; also Bandera, Blanco, Comal, Kendall and Travis
cos. to the s of nc TX (Mahler 1988); Edwards Plateau n to very s edge of nc TX; endemic to TX.
Fall. E

Muhlenbergia lindheimeri Hitchc., (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, German born
TX botanist), LINDHEIMER’S MUHLY. Large tufted perennial with stiffly erect culms usually 80–
100(–150) cm tall; panicles (10–)20–54 cm long, tightly or loosely contracted, densely flowered;
panicle branches with flowers nearly to base; lemmas ca. 2–4 mm long, glabrous, scabrous, or
puberulent, awnless or infrequently with awn to 3(–4) mm long. Mesic limestone areas and
creek banks; Bell Co.; mainly Edwards Plateau n to s part of nc TX. Sep–Dec.

Muhlenbergia mexicana (L.) Trin., (Name given under mistaken idea that the species is Mexi-
can). Rhizomatous perennial; culms 30–90 cm tall, much-branched above; ligules to 1 mm long;
panicles slender, the branches densely flowered; spikelets 2–4 mm long; glumes ca. equaling
floret, with awn to 1.5 mm long; lemmas 1.3–3.4 mm long, awnless or with awn to 0.5 mm long,
pilose basally. Thickets and field borders; a Reverchon collection (4110) reported from
Granbury, Hood Co. is the only known TX collection (Gould 1975b). Summer–fall.

Muhlenbergia reverchonii Vasey & Scribn., (for Julien Reverchon, 1837–1905, a French-American
immigrant to Dallas and important botanical collector of early TX), SEEP MUHLY, REVERCHON’S
MUHLY. Densely tufted perennial; culms stiffly erect, 40–80 cm tall; ligules 2–4 mm long;
panicles open; glumes to 3 mm long; lemmas glabrous or scabrous, 3.5–5 mm long, with awn
0.5–4(–7) mm long. Calcareous soils, typically in moist or wet areas; mainly Blackland Prairie w
to West Cross Timbers and s to Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov. The inflorescences can have a strik-
ing reddish appearance (J. Stanford, pers. comm.).
                                                                             ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1289




Muhlenbergia schreberi [REE]                    Muhlenbergia sobolifera [HI1]



                                                                                             Muhlenbergia sylvatica [USB]




   Muhlenbergia utilis [HI1]                             Nassella leucotricha [GO1]




                                                                                               Oplismenus hirtellus [USB]




                               Panicum aciculare var. aciculare [HI1]
1290 POACEAE/NASSELLA

Muhlenbergia schreberi J.F. Gmel., (for Johann Daniel Christian von Schreber, 1739–1810, Ger-
man botanist), NIMBLE-WILL, SATIN GRASS, SCHREBER’S MUHLY. Perennial; culms decumbent below,
rooting at lower nodes, usually 10–40(–60) cm tall, much-branched; ligules to 0.5 mm long;
panicles contracted; lemmas 2–2.5 mm long, with awn 1.5–5 mm long, pilose basally. Woods
and thickets; Bell, Collin, Dallas, Denton, and Fannin cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers,
also Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct.

Muhlenbergia sobolifera (Muhl. ex Willd.) Trin., (bearing sprouts), ROCK MUHLY, ROCK-DROPSEED.
Rhizomatous perennial; culms 40–85(–100) cm tall, much-branched above; ligules to 1 mm
long; glumes about equal, overlapping basally; lemmas 2–3 mm long, awnless or with awn to 3
mm long, pubescent basally. Rocky slopes, open woods; Grayson Co., also Brown, Hamilton
(HPC), and Dallas (Mahler 1988) cos.; also infrequent in e TX and Edwards Plateau. Sep–Oct.
Including [M. sobolifera var. setigera Scribn.], the type of which was collected by Reverchon (70)
at Dallas (Mahler 1988).

Muhlenbergia sylvatica Torr. ex A. Gray, (forest-loving), FOREST MUHLY. Rhizomatous perennial;
culms decumbent or sprawling below, usually 40–100 cm long, freely branching at middle
nodes; internodes puberulent; ligules to 2.5 mm long; panicles terminal, slender, contracted;
lemmas 2.2–3.2 mm long, pilose basally, with awns 3–10(–18) mm long. Woods and shaded
stream banks; included based on citations of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Gould
(1975b) and Hatch et al. (1990); mainly Edwards Plateau. Aug–Sep.

Muhlenbergia utilis (Torr.) Hitchc., (useful), APAREJO GRASS, APAREJO MUHLY. Low rhizomatous pe-
rennial; culms 20–40 cm long; panicles narrow, interrupted, loosely flowered, 1–4 cm long; lem-
mas 1.6–2 mm long, minutely scabrous, scarcely mucronate. Along streams, marshy meadows,
usually very wet areas of calcareous soils; Tarrant Co.; mainly Edwards Plateau. Late summer–fall.

                                          NASSELLA
AA genus of 79 species of warm and tropical areas of the Americas, especially the Andes; re-
lated to and previously treated in Stipa. (Latin: nassa, a basket with a narrow neck) (subfamily
Pooideae, tribe Stipeae)
REFERENCES: Hitchcock 1925; Brown 1952; Barkworth 1990, 1993.

Nassella leucotricha (Trin. & Rupr.) Barkworth, (white-haired), WINTER GRASS, TEXAS WINTER
GRASS, SPEAR GRASS, TEXAS NEEDLE GRASS. Perennial, tufted, 25–100 cm tall, green from late fall
to summer; ligules variable, from absent to a 1 mm membrane; axillary, cleistogamous florets
produced basally in addition to terminal panicles; spikelets 1-flowered; glumes acuminate, 14–
18 mm long; lemma 9–12 mm long, with very long (4.5–10 cm), geniculate awn; lemma apex
with smooth white neck and ring of hairs around awn base; caryopsis permanently enclosed
within the lemma. Prairies, disturbed sites; throughout TX. Apr–May. A minor component of
original prairie, increasing under disturbance. The lemma base and rachilla form a callus that
is so sharp-pointed that it will easily stick into clothing or skin; wounds can result including
those to the mouth of animals (Lipscomb & Diggs 1998). [Stipa leucotricha Trin. & Rupr.]

                                        OPLISMENUS
AA genus of 7 species of the tropics and warm areas including O. hirtellus cultivar variegatus,
a cultivated greenhouse hanging-basket plant. (Greek: hoplismos, a weapon, referring to the
awns) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Hitchcock 1920a; Davey & Clayton 1978; Scholz 1981; Crins 1991.

Oplismenus hirtellus (L.) P. Beauv., (rather hairy), BASKET GRASS. Perennial with culms creeping
and rooting at the nodes; ligule a ciliate membrane; leaf blades 1.5–7 cm long, 5–15 mm wide,
                                                                                             PANICUM/POACEAE 1291

widely spreading to reflexed; inflorescences of 3–7 widely spaced, very short, spike-like
branches ca. 1–6 mm long; spikelets sessile or nearly so, in 2 rows on 1 side of the inflorescence
branches, 2-flowered, the lower floret sterile, the upper floret perfect; glumes awned; awn of
first glume 5–10 mm long, much longer than awn of second glume; fertile lemma indurate, the
margins virtually enclosing the palea. Tarrant Co., also Limestone Co. near the e edge of nc TX;
mainly se and e TX. Summer–Oct. Native to New World tropics and subtropics. The nc TX speci-
mens of this species were treated as O. hirtellus subsp. setarius by Correll and Johnston (1970)
and Gould (1975b), while recognized as a separate species, O. setarius, by Kartesz (1994). We are
following Davey and Clayton (1978) whose worldwide study of the group indicated that the two
taxa should be lumped; Crins (1991) and Jones et al. (1997) also treated the two as conspecific. [O.
hirtellus subsp. setarius (Lam.) Mez ex Ekman, O. setarius (Lam.) Roem. & Schult.] I

                                         PANICUM PANIC GRASS
Annuals or perennials with or without rhizomes; basal rosette leaves not developed (basal
leaves few, usually withering by flowering time) or in subgenus Dichanthelium basal tuft or
rosette of leaves shorter and wider than those of the culms present, produced from fall to
spring, persistent; ligule usually a membrane, often ciliate or with a fringe of hairs; panicles
much-branched, normally produced in one continuous period of bloom, terminal or both ter-
minal and lateral together or in subgenus Dichanthelium terminal panicles on mostly simple
culms produced in spring and early summer, and a second crop of more numerous lateral or
basal panicles produced in late summer or fall (often of cleistogamous spikelets) (descriptions
are of spring phase only, autumnal phase often quite different); spikelets awnless, 2-flowered,
the lower floret sterile or staminate, the upper floret perfect; glumes usually both present, the
first typically shorter; lower lemma resembling second glume; upper (perfect) lemma firm to
hardened, shiny and glabrous with inrolled margins.
AA huge genus of > 600 species in 6 subgenera making it the largest genus of grasses (Zuloaga
1987); the species are native from tropical to temperate areas throughout the world and a num-
ber are used as fodders, grains, or cultivated ornamentals. The segregate Dichanthelium has
been recognized by Gould (1974), Kartesz (1994), and others (e.g., Hatch et al. 1990) on the basis
of such characters as having an overwintering rosette of short broad leaves, uniformly having
the C3 photosynthetic pathway, and possessing spring chasmogamous inflorescences and later
in the season small, axillary, cleistogamous inflorescences. However, the overlap and blurring of
these and other characters in Central and South American taxa brings the generic recognition
of Dichanthelium into question (Zuloaga 1987). We are thus following Lelong (1984), Zuloaga
(1987), Webster (1988), Zuloaga et al. (1993), Zuloaga and Morrone 1996, and Jones et al. (1997) in
treating Dichanthelium (15 nc TX species) and Steinchisma (1 species in nc TX) as subgenera
within Panicum. The other nc TX species of Panicum are scattered in 3 of the other 4 subgen-
era of the genus. Species here treated as Urochloa have previously been lumped with Panicum;
some of these are included in the Panicum key as an aid in identification. (Latin: panus, an ear
of millet) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Hitchcock & Chase 1910; Silveus 1942; Gould 1974; Allred & Gould 1978; Gould &
Clark 1978; Lelong 1984, 1986; McGregor 1985a; Zuloaga 1987; Hansen & Wunderlin 1988;
Webster 1988, 1992; Webster et al. 1989; Crins 1991; Zuloaga et al. 1993; Wipff & Jones 1994
[1995]; Zuloaga & Morrone 1996.

1. Basal leaves usually similar to those of the culm, only smaller, basal rosette absent; small axillary
   panicles absent in fall; plants annual or perennial; sometimes segregated as genus Panicum sensu
   stricto.
   2. Plants annual, without rhizomes, enlarged hard or knotty bases, or densely clumped culms.
1292 POACEAE/PANICUM

   3. Inflorescence consisting of several ± secund spike-like primary branches; spikelets
      subsessile or short-pedicelled; fertile lemma transversely rugose.
      4. Spikelets 5–6 mm long                                                          see Urochloa texana
      4. Spikelets 2.4–3 mm long                                                   see Urochloa fasciculata
   3. Inflorescence a ± diffuse panicle; spikelets short- or long-pedicelled; fertile lemma
      smooth.
      5. Spikelets conspicuously warty under a hand lens (second glume and lower lemma
         verrucose or tuberculate); only at far e margin of nc TX                           P. brachyanthum
      5. Spikelets not warty; widespread in nc TX.
         6. First glume about 1/4 as long as spikelet, obtuse or rounded                 P. dichotomiflorum
         6. First glume > 1/4 as long as spikelet, acute or acuminate.
            7. Spikelets 4.5–5 mm long                                                           P. miliaceum
            7. Spikelets 1.5–3.5 mm long.
               8. Spikelets 1.8–3.5 mm long, long acuminate at tip; panicles nearly as broad
                  as long; rare in nc TX                                                  P. philadelphicum
              8. Spikelets 1.5–2(–2.2) mm long, acute to slightly acuminate at tip; panicles
                 usually distinctly longer than broad; includes species widespread in nc TX.
                 9. Palea of lower floret usually absent (do not be confused by lodicules); leaves
                   yellow-green; inflorescences often with reddish or purplish coloration; fertile
                   lemma lacking a crescent-shaped marking at its base; widespread in nc TX                P. capillare
                  9. Palea of lower floret present; leaves blue-green; inflorescences usually
                     without reddish or purplish coloration; fertile lemma with a crescent-shaped
                     marking at its base; on extreme w margin of nc TX                                     P. hillmanii
 2. Plants perennial, often with rhizomes, enlarged hard or knotty bases, or culms densely clumped.
    10. Spikelets short-pedicelled along one side of the branch axes, forming appressed spike-
        like inflorescence branches; inflorescence branches usually not themselves branched; first
        glume about as long as second                                                                      P. obtusum
    10. Spikelets short- or long-pedicelled, in open or sometimes contracted or congested panicles;
        inflorescence branches usually themselves branched; first glume usually shorter than
        second.
        11. Sterile palea enlarged and indurate at maturity, giving the spikelets an expanded ap-
             pearance (spikelets at maturity gaping open at apex); spikelets 1.8–2.6 mm long, borne
             toward the ends of the few slender branches (subgenus Steinchisma)                                P. hians
        11. Sterile palea usually absent or minute if present; spikelets and branching various.
             12. Plants with conspicuous, creeping, scaly rhizomes.
                 13. First glume < 1/2 as long as spikelet; spikelets on short pedicels so appressed
                     as to make the spikelets appear sessile; spikelets 2.8–3.5 mm long; panicles open
                     or contracted, usually sparsely branched                                                P. anceps
                 13. First glume > 1/2 as long as spikelet; spikelets on relatively long, only slightly
                     appressed pedicels; spikelets 2.8–5 mm long; panicles usually open, much
                     branched                                                                              P. virgatum
             12. Plants without creeping scaly rhizomes.
                 14. Spikelets short-pedicelled (appearing nearly sessile) along the usually un-
                     branched inflorescence branches or on short spur branches; spikelets 1.6–2.5
                     mm long; plants typically of low moist areas                                         P. rigidulum
                 14. Spikelets either long-pedicelled in open panicles OR if very short-pedicelled
                     then the inflorescence open and its branches rebranched; spikelets 2.1–3.9
                     mm long; plants of various habitats.
                     15. Culms (at least the lower part) knotty, the conspicuously swollen nodes
                          as much as twice as thick as the middle of the internodes                       P. antidotale
                                                                                                 PANICUM/POACEAE 1293

                      15. Culms not as above.
                          16. Lower inflorescence branches in verticels of 3–7, pilose in the axils;
                              inflorescences often nearly half the height of the entire plant; e mar-
                              gin of nc TX                                                                           P. bergii
                          16. Lower inflorescence branches usually solitary, glabrescent in the ax-
                              ils; inflorescences usually 6–25 cm long; including species widespread
                              in nc TX.
                              17. First glume ca. 1/4 as long as spikelet, abruptly narrowed to an
                                     acute apex                                                                P. coloratum
                              17. First glume 1/2 as long as spikelets or longer, gradually narrowed
                                     to an acute to acuminate apex.
                                     18. Leaf sheath margins often ciliate with a line of ascending
                                          hairs; nodes spreading-pilose; plants green                            P. diffusum
                                     18. Leaf sheath margins glabrous or with a tuft of hairs at the
                                         summit, not ciliate; nodes appressed-pubescent or glabrous;
                                         plants often glaucous                                                        P. hallii
1. Basal leaves usually different from those of the culm, forming a basal rosette; small axillary panicles
   on reduced lateral shoots present in fall; plants perennial; (subgenus Dichanthelium) sometimes
   segregated as genus Dichanthelium.
   19. Blades of basal and culm leaves all 15–40 times as long as wide, 1–4 mm wide.
       20. Spikelets 2.1–4.2 mm long; leaf sheaths glabrous or pilose with spreading to ascending hairs.
            21. Spikelets 2.1–3.0 mm long                                                                  P. linearifolium
           21. Spikelets 3.0–4.2 mm long                                                           P. depauperatum
      20. Spikelets 1.7–2.1 mm long; leaf sheaths pilose with widely spreading to slightly reflexed
           hairs                                                                                           P. laxiflorum
  19. Blades of basal and lowest culm leaves 3–15 times as long as wide (of upper culm leaves up
      to 20 times), 2–30(–35) mm wide.
      22. Spikelets 2.4–4.3 mm long.
          23. Nodes with a dense ring of widely spreading to reflexed hairs.
               24. Spikelets 2.6–3.2 mm long.
                   25. Node lacking a broad glabrous region; leaf blades 5–12 mm wide; culms
                        0.3–0.7 m tall, slender (< 2 mm thick)                                    P. malacophyllum
                   25. Node with a broad, conspicuous, glabrous region (in addition to a ring of
                        hairs); leaf blades 3–30 mm wide; culms usually 0.8–1.5 m tall, stout (usually
                        2–4 mm thick)                                                                     P. scoparium
               24. Spikelets 3.6–4.2 mm long.
                   26. Leaf blades velvety-pubescent beneath; ligule of hairs 3–4 mm long                     P. ravenelii
                   26. Leaf blades not velvety-pubescent beneath, glabrous or with only scattered
                        pubescence; ligule essentially absent                                                     P. boscii
          23. Nodes with spreading to ascending hairs, or glabrous.
               27. Leaf blades usually 12 mm or less wide.
                   28. Spikelets narrowly obovate, gradually tapering to a narrow base, 3–3.9 mm
                       long                                                                            P. pedicellatum
                   28. Spikelets ovate, oblong, or slightly obovate, not tapering gradually to a nar-
                       row base, 2.4–4 mm long.
                       29. Hairs of ligules 1.5–6 mm long.
                            30. Spikelets 2.4–2.7 mm long                               P. acuminatum var. villosum
                            30. Spikelets usually 2.7–4 mm long                                        P. oligosanthes
                       29. Hairs of ligules absent or < 1.5 mm long.
1294 POACEAE/PANICUM

                         31. Spikelets usually 2.7–4 mm long; second glume and lower lemma
                              usually 5-nerved; widespread in nc TX                                  P. oligosanthes
                         31. Spikelets 2.4–2.8 mm long; second glume and lower lemma usually
                              7-nerved; rare in nc TX, reported only from Dallas and Lamar cos.
                                                                                                           P. aciculare
             27. Leaf blades (at least larger ones) usually 13–35 mm wide.
                 32. Leaf blades velvety-tomentose or puberulent beneath, glabrous or puberu-
                     lent above; spikelets 2.4–2.8 mm long                                              P. scoparium
                 32. Leaf blades not velvety-tomentose or puberulent beneath (or if so, spikelets
                     2.8–4 mm long), often glabrous on both surfaces; spikelets 2.4–4 mm long.
                     33. Spikelets broadly elliptic to obovate, turgid, with heavy broad nerves;
                         leaf blades 5–15 mm wide                                                    P. oligosanthes
                     33. Spikelets narrowly elliptic to obovate, neither turgid nor strongly nerved;
                         leaf blades (8–)13–35 mm wide.
                         34. Leaf blades usually < 10 cm long; leaf sheaths glabrous or pubescent
                              on margins                                                                 P. divergens
                          34. Leaf blades mostly 10–20(–28) cm long; leaf sheaths, at least lower
                              ones, papillose hispid with spreading hairs                        P. clandestinum
      22. Spikelets 1.3–2.4 mm long.
          35. Leaf blades glabrous except near base or on margins.
              36. Ligules 1.5–6.0 mm long                                        P. acuminatum var. lindheimeri
              36. Ligules 1.3 mm or less long, or apparently absent.
                  37. Leaf sheaths with widely spreading to slightly reflexed hairs 2.5–3.5 mm
                       long                                                                            P. laxiflorum
                  37. Leaf sheaths either with ascending hairs up to 2 mm long OR glabrous.
                       38. Blades of larger culm leaves 3–6 mm wide, narrowed or rounded at base,
                           not auricled.
                           39. Spikelets 2.0–2.3 mm long, 1.0–1.3 mm wide                               P. aciculare
                           39. Spikelets 1.3–2.0 mm long, 0.6–1.0 mm wide                         P. dichotomum
                       38. Blades of larger culm leaves 5–30 mm wide, abruptly narrowed to sub-
                           cordate base, slightly auricled-clasping                            P. sphaerocarpon
          35. Leaf blades sparsely to densely pubescent or pilose over one or both surfaces.
              40. Spikelets 2.2–2.4 mm long; species rare in nc TX.
                  41. Blades of largest culm leaves usually 8–30 mm wide; hairs of ligules 1–1.3
                       mm long                                                                        P. scoparium
                  41. Blades of largest culm leaves usually 5–12 mm wide; hairs of ligules 1.5–6
                       mm long                                                        P. acuminatum var. villosum
              40. Spikelets 1–2.1 mm long; species common in nc TX                                 P. acuminatum

Panicum aciculare Desv. ex Poir., (bristle-like). Plant 30–75 cm tall; leaves with lower sheaths
sparsely pilose, the upper sheaths and blades glabrous or with some pubescence. Sandy woods;
Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988), also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly se and e TX. Apr–Jun, also late
summer–fall. The variation within this taxon has sometimes been given no formal recognition
(e.g., Gould & Clark 1978) or recognized at the species level (e.g., Lelong 1986); we are following
Wipff and Jones (1994 [1995]) in recognizing it at the varietal level. While we have not seen ma-
terial to determine varietal status of the 2 citations given above, it is possible that both of the
following occur in nc TX. Lelong (1986) separated them (as species) as follows:

1. Spikelets 1.7–2.2 mm long; leaf blades 3.5–8 cm long and up to 4 mm wide                             var. aciculare
1. Spikelets 2.4–2.8 mm long; leaf blades 5–15 cm long and up to 7 mm wide                        var. angustifolium
                                                                                    PANICUM/POACEAE 1295

var. aciculare. [Dichanthelium aciculare (Desv. ex Poir.) Gould & C.A. Clark, Panicum ovinum
Scribn. & J.S. Sm.]

var. angustifolium (Elliott) Wipff & S.D. Jones, (narrow-leaved). [Dichanthelium angustifolium
(Elliott) Gould, P. angustifolium Elliott]

Panicum acuminatum Sw., (long-pointed, tapering to tip). Plant 10–65 cm tall; leaf blades usu-
ally 3–12 mm wide.

1. Spikelets 1–2.1 mm long; widespread in nc TX.
   2. Leaf sheaths usually densely long pilose, the hairs on upper part spreading at right angles,
      2.5–4 mm long; culms usually pilose with nodes bearded                                    var. acuminatum
   2. Leaf sheaths glabrous to with some pubescence (particularly on margins), if present then
      hairs on upper part ascending, 1–2 mm long; culms glabrous or internodes sparsely pilose
                                                                                              var. lindheimeri
1. Spikelets 2.2–2.7 mm long; mainly e TX                                                          var. villosum

var. acuminatum. WOOLLY ROSETTE GRASS, WOOLLY PANIC. Plant usually pilose. Sandy open woods;
Bell, Denton, and Grayson cos.; widespread in TX. Apr–Jun, again late summer–fall. [Dichanthe-
lium acuminatum (Sw.) Gould & C.A. Clark var. fasciculatum (Torr.) Freckmann, Dichanthelium
acuminatum var. implicatum (Scribn.) Gould & C.A. Clark, Dichanthelium lanuginosum
(Elliott) Gould, P. acuminatum var. fasciculatum (Torr.) Lelong, P. lanuginosum Elliott]

var. lindheimeri (Nash) Lelong, (for Ferdinand Jacob Lindheimer, 1801–1879, German born TX
botanist), LINDHEIMER’S ROSETTE GRASS, LINDHEIMER’S PANIC. Plant nearly glabrous or with sparse
pubescence. Sandy or rocky ground, in sun or shade; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also
Edwards Plateau. Apr–Jun, again late summer–fall. [Dichanthelium acuminatum var.
lindheimeri (Nash) Gould & C.A. Clark, Dichanthelium lanuginosum (Elliott) Gould var.
lindheimeri (Nash) Fernald, Dichanthelium lindheimeri (Nash) Gould, P. lanuginosum
(Elliott) Gould var. lindheimeri (Nash) Fernald, P. lindheimeri Nash]

var. villosum (A. Gray) Beetle, (soft-hairy), WHITE-HAIRED ROSETTE GRASS, WHITE-HAIRED PANIC.
Plant usually 20–60 cm tall; culms and leaf blades pilose; leaf sheaths with erect-spreading
hairs to 3 mm long; spikelets 2.2–2.7 mm long. Sandy woods; Parker Co. (Gould 1975b), also
Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly e TX. Apr–Jun, also late summer–fall. [Dichanthelium
acuminatum (Sw.) Gould & C.A. Clark var. villosum (A. Gray) Gould & C.A. Clark,
Dichanthelium lanuginosum (Elliott) Gould var. villosissimum (Nash) Gould, Dichanthelium
villosissimum (Nash) Freckmann, P. acuminatum var. villosum (A. Gray) Beetle, P. ovale Elliott
var. villosum (A. Gray) Lelong, P. villosissimum Nash] While we are following Jones et al. (1997)
in recognizing this taxon as a variety, according to J. Wipff (pers. comm.), var. acuminatum and
var. villosum are separated by only one weak character (amount and length of pubescence on
the leaf sheaths and blades) which apparently intergrades completely; as a result, he suggests
treating var. villosum as a synonym of var. acuminatum. However, Kartesz (1994) and J. Kartesz
(pers. comm. 1997) treated var. villosum as a distinct species, Dichanthelium villosissimum.

Panicum anceps Michx., (two-edged), BEAKED PANICUM. Perennial 30–100 cm tall with stout rhi-
zomes; ligule a minute membranous collar 0.4 mm or less long. Low moist areas; se and e TX w
to Grand Prairie and Edwards Plateau. Jul–Nov. [P. anceps var. rhizomatum (Hitchc. & Chase)
Fernald, P. rhizomatum Hitchc. & Chase] Jones et al. (1997) recognized var. rhizomatum.

Panicum antidotale Retz., (acting as or of the nature of an antidote), BLUE PANIC. Perennial 0.5–
2(–3) m tall. Resembling P. hallii, with ligules like that of P. bergii. Recommended by some for
planting as a forage grass; widely introduced into TX; included based on citation of vegetational
area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990). Spring–fall. Native of India. I
1296 POACEAE/PANICUM

Panicum bergii Arechav., (derivation not known). Tufted perennial 50–100 cm tall; lower nodes
with a collar of hairs; leaves with sheaths sparsely pilose, the blades densely so at base; ligule a
short membranous base (ca. 0.5 mm long) with fringe of hairs to 2.5 mm long; panicles open,
the lower branches in verticils of 3–7, the whole inflorescence disarticulating as a tumbleweed
at maturity; spikelets glabrous. Low areas; Navarro Co.; se TX nw to e edge of nc TX. Late Apr–
May. Native of s South America. [P. pilcomayense Hack.] We are following Jones et al. (1997) and J.
Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) for nomenclature of this species. I

Panicum boscii Poir., (for its discoverer, Louis Augustin Guillaume Bosc, 1759–1828, French natu-
ralist). Plant ca. 40–70 cm tall; leaves with sheaths and blades glabrous or with only scattered
pubescence; leaf blades to 2.6(–3) cm wide. Wooded or low areas; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994) in Red
River drainage; mainly e TX. Mainly Apr–Jul., also fall. [Dichanthelium boscii (Poir.) Gould &
C.A. Clark]

Panicum brachyanthum Steud., (short-flowered), PIMPLE PANICUM. Glabrous annual with erect to
decumbent culms to ca. 100 cm long; panicles few-flowered; spikelets 3–3.6 mm long, conspicu-
ously warty, covered with short stiff hairs. Open, often sandy woods, fencerows, along high-
ways; Lamar Co. (Carr 1994), also Henderson and Milam cos. near the e edge of nc TX; mainly
se and e TX. Panicum verrucosum Muhl., also with warty spikelets, is known just e of nc TX in
e Henderson Co. It has glabrous, much smaller spikelets 1.8–2.6 mm long.

Panicum capillare L., (hair-like), WITCH GRASS. Annual with erect to partly decumbent culms 8–
100 cm long; leaf blades usually hirsute or pilose on both surfaces or blades glabrous on upper
surface (occasionally merely ciliate marginally below); leaf sheaths with papilla-based hairs;
ligules of hairs; panicles very open, large for size of plant, often with reddish or purplish colora-
tion. Disturbed areas and banks of ponds and streams; nearly throughout TX, most common in
nc TX. May–Oct. Superficially similar to Digitaria cognata which differs in having essentially
glabrous leaves and usually lacking a first glume (or glume vestigial). Some authorities (e.g.,
Jones et al. 1997) recognize a number of varieties for this species.

Panicum clandestinum L., (hidden), DEER-TONGUE, DEER-TONGUE ROSETTE GRASS. Plant 50–150
cm tall. Sandy woods; collected at Dallas by Reverchon in 1875, not found there since (Mahler
1988); mainly e TX. Apr–Jun, again late summer–fall. [Dichanthelium clandestinum (L.) Gould]

Panicum coloratum L., (colored), KLEIN GRASS. Tufted perennial usually 60–135 cm tall from of-
ten knotty bases; ligule a fringed membrane 0.5–2 mm long including hairs; leaf sheaths glabrous
or with papilla-based hairs; leaf blades glabrous or with pubescence. Introduced as a forage
grass; Somervell Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.), also cited for vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by
Hatch et al. (1990); also Post Oak Savannah and Edwards Plateau. May–Sep. Native to Africa. I

Panicum depauperatum Muhl., (impoverished), STARVED ROSETTE GRASS. Similar to P.
linearifolium and possibly intergrading with it; plant to 35 cm tall; leaves pilose to hispid or
nearly glabrous, the sheaths common thinly pilose, the blades often glabrous on upper surface.
Woods, roadsides; Lamar Co., also Grayson Co. (Mahler 1988); mainly e TX w in Red River
drainage. Apr–May. [Dichanthelium depauperatum (Muhl.) Gould]

Panicum dichotomiflorum Michx., (with forking inflorescence), FALL PANICUM, SPREADING WITCH
GRASS. Coarse annual with culms 1–2 m long, erect or trailing; ligule a 0.5–1 mm long mem-
brane ciliate with hairs ca. 2 mm long; leaf blades usually glabrous (rarely puberulent). Moist,
disturbed soils; in nc TX w to Cooke and Tarrant cos.; widepread in TX. Aug–Nov.

Panicum dichotomum L., (2-forked or parted). Plant rather slender, 25–60 cm tall, glabrous ex-
cept for nodes, summit of leaf sheaths, and margins of leaf blades near base; spikelets very
small. Low sandy woods; included based on citation of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by
                                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1297




                        Panicum acuminatum var. acuminatum [HI1]                         Panicum acuminatum var. lindheimeri [HI1]




Panicum acuminatum var. villosum [USB]                  Panicum anceps [USB]                     Panicum antidotale [GO1]




            Panicum bergii [HEA]                         Panicum boscii [BB2]                     Panicum brachyanthum [GO1]
1298 POACEAE/PANICUM

Gould (1975b) and Hatch et al. (1990); mainly se and e TX. Apr–Jun, also late summer–fall.
[Dichanthelium dichotomum (L.) Gould, P. barbulatum Michx., P. lucidum Ashe, P. microcarpon
Muhl. ex Elliott, P. nitidum Lam., P. roanokense Ashe, P. yadkinense Nash] Jones et al. (1997) rec-
ognized five varieties of this species in TX.

Panicum diffusum Sw., (diffuse, spreading), SPREADING PANICUM. Perennial in small dense tufts;
culms slender, spreading (rarely ascending), often branching, usually to ca. 30 cm long but oc-
casionally much longer; nodes pubescent; ligule a membrane ca. 0.5–1 mm long ciliate with hairs
1–2 mm long; leaf blades usually glabrous or spreading pilose; leaf sheaths glabrous or with
papilla-based hairs. Disturbed loamy or clayey soils; throughout most of TX. Apr–Nov. Zuloaga
and Morrone (1996) indicated that this species is found on Carribean Islands and does not occur
in the U.S.; Jones et al. (1997) lumped it with P. hallii var. filipes. Stephan Hatch (pers. comm.)
considers this species to occur in TX and to be distinct from P. hallii.

Panicum divergens Kunth, (wide-spreading), VARIABLE ROSETTE GRASS. Culms 40–75 cm tall;
larger leaf blades cordate at base, usually < 10 cm long, occasionally up to 15 cm. Sandy woods;
Lamar Co. (Carr 1994) in Red River drainage; mainly se and e TX. Apr–Jun, again late summer–
fall. [Dichanthelium commutatum (Schult.) Gould, P. commutatum Schult.] We are following
Jones et al. (1997) for nomenclature of this species.

Panicum hallii Vasey, (for its discoverer, Elihu Hall, 1822–1882, American botanist and explorer
of Rocky Mts.). Tufted perennial 12–80 cm tall; leaves sparsely pilose to glabrous; ligule a short,
fibrous, readily splitting membrane, with fringe of hairs to 1.3 mm long; panicles open, rather
small. Prairies, disturbed sites, commonest on limestone or calcareous clay. Apr–Nov.

1. Panicle branches usually > 15; spikelets 2–3 mm long; leaf sheaths without papilla-based hairs
                                                                                                    var. filipes
1. Panicle branches usually < 15; spikelets 3–3.7 mm long; leaf sheaths mostly with papilla-based
   hairs                                                                                             var. hallii

var. filipes (Scribn.) F.R. Waller, (slender), FILLY PANICUM. In nc TX known only from Palo Pinto
and Tarrant cos.; widely distributed in TX. [P. filipes Scribn.]

var. hallii. HALL’S PANIC. Nearly throughout TX.

Panicum hians Elliott, (gaping), GAPING PANICUM. Perennial with culms erect or decumbent at
base; nodes glabrous or scabrous; leaf sheaths glabrous or with hairs on upper margins; ligule a
short glabrous membrane ca. 0.5 mm long; panicles usually 6–20 cm long, the lower 1–3 cm of
branches bare of spikelets; spikelets glabrous, 1.8–2.6 mm long, at maturity gaping open at
apex; lemma and palea of perfect floret firm, but not tough and hard or grain-like; glumes both
present, the first 1/3–1/2 as long as spikelet; lower lemma resembling second glume; upper
(perfect) lemma with inrolled margins; palea of the lower (neuter) floret inflated, obovate, of-
ten apiculate, distinctive, larger than the lemma and giving the spikelet an expanded or gaping
appearance. Low areas, moist soils, often in shade; Dallas, Grayson, and Hunt cos.; se and e TX w
to Blackland Prairie and Edwards Plateau. Apr–Oct, typically early in growing season. Treated
here in subgenus Steinchisma (Zuloaga 1987); sometimes segregated into the monotypic genus
Steinchisma [as S. hians (Elliott) Nash].

Panicum hillmanii Chase, (for Fred Hillman, 1863–1954, botanist at U.S. Dept. of Agriculture),
HILLMAN’S PANICUM. Annual 20–65 cm tall; similar to P. capillare and possibly conspecific with
it; inflorescences usually without reddish or purplish coloration (such coloration often present
in P. capillare); fertile lemma with a crescent-shaped marking at its base. Disturbed areas; Ar-
cher and Brown cos. (McGregor 1985a); mostly n and w TX. Mostly Jul–Oct. The validity of P.
hillmanii as a distinct species was questioned by Correll and Johnston (1970) and Gould
                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1299




      Panicum capillare [HI1]     Panicum clandestinum [USB]                         Panicum coloratum [HEA]




Panicum depauperatum [USB]       Panicum dichotomiflorum [REE]                   Panicum dichotomum [USB]




   Panicum diffusum [HEA, USH]                                 Panicum divergens [HI1]
1300 POACEAE/PANICUM

(1975b); however, McGregor (1985a) concluded that it is distinct and Zuloaga and Morrone
(1996) in a treatment of section Panicum, treated it as a distinct species. Jones et al. (1997) gave [P.
capillare L. subsp. hillmanii (Chase) Freckmann & Lelong [ined.]] as a synonym.

Panicum laxiflorum Lam., (loosely-flowered), OPEN-FLOWER ROSETTE GRASS, OPEN-FLOWER PANIC.
Plant 12–50 cm tall; leaf sheaths and blades pilose; margins of leaf blades with conspicuously
long hairs, at least near base. Sandy woods, especially in low ground; Fannin and Lamar cos.;
mainly e TX w to nc TX in Red River drainage. Apr–Jun, again late summer–fall.
[Dichanthelium laxiflorum (Lam.) Gould]

Panicum linearifolium Scribn. ex Nash, (linear-leaved), SLIM-LEAF ROSETTE GRASS, SLIM-LEAF
PANIC. Plant 15–50 cm tall; leaf sheaths pilose or rarely glabrous. Dry sandy woods or open
ground; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun, again late sum-
mer–fall. [Dichanthelium linearifolium (Scribn. ex Nash) Gould]

Panicum malacophyllum Nash, (soft-leaved), SOFT-LEAF ROSETTE GRASS, SOFT-LEAF PANIC. Plant
25–60 cm tall; leaf sheaths pilose; leaf blades densely soft-pubescent. Sandy or rocky woods;
Bosque, Cook, Dallas, Hood, and Lamar cos.; in TX only in nc part. Apr–Jun, again late summer–
fall. [Dichanthelium malacophyllum (Nash) Gould]

Panicum miliaceum L., (like millet grass—Milium), BROOMCORN MILLET, PROSO, HOG MILLET,
RUSSIAN MILLET, COMMON MILLET. Coarse annual 20–100 cm tall; leaf sheaths with long papilla-
based hairs; leaf blades variously pubescent to glabrous; ligule a fringed membrane ca. 1–3 mm
long including the hairs; spikelets plump, broadly ovate to elliptic. Escapes cultivation in dis-
turbed areas; Montague Co.; also reported from nw TX. Jul–Nov. Cultivated in Europe and Asia
as a grain crop for humans, here more commonly as animal food. Native to the Old World,
probably c Asia (Zohary & Hopf 1994). I

Panicum obtusum Kunth, (blunt), VINE-MESQUITE. Perennial 12–50 cm tall, from knotty, rhi-
zomatous base, producing stolons up to 2 m long; culms erect or partly decumbent; nodes
densely hairy (on stolons) or nearly glabrous (on erect culms); leaf blades usually ± glabrous;
ligule a short membrane 1–2 mm long; inflorescences narrow, spike-like; spikelets swollen, el-
lipsoidal. Low prairies, roadsides; nearly throughout TX. Jun–Oct. A native weed, sometimes
planted for pasture or erosion control.

Panicum oligosanthes Schult., (few-flowered). Culms spreading to erect, 15–65 cm long; ligules
0.1–4.2 mm long. Open woods or open areas. Apr–Jun, again late summer–fall.

1. Lower leaf sheaths pilose with appressed or ascending hairs without swollen bases; spikelets 3–
   4 mm long; ligules usually 1.6 mm or more long; leaf blades with lower surfaces tomentose or
   occasionally puberulent                                                                         var. oligosanthes
1. Lower leaf sheaths glabrous or pilose with ascending to spreading hairs from swollen bases;
   spikelets usually 2.7–3.6 mm long; ligules usually < 1.6 mm long; leaf blades with lower surfaces
   glabrous to puberulent, never tomentose                                                       var. scribnerianum

var. oligosanthes. Sandy soils; e 1/2 of TX. [Dichanthelium oligosanthes (Schult.) Gould]

var. scribnerianum (Nash) Gould, (for Frank Lamson Scribner, 1851–1938, agrostologist, U.S.
Dept. of Agriculture), SCRIBNER’S ROSETTE GRASS. Sandy soils, occasionally in limestone gravel;
throughout TX. [Dichanthelium oligosanthes (Schult.) Gould var. scribnerianum (Nash) Gould,
P. helleri Nash]

Panicum pedicellatum Vasey, (stalked), CEDAR ROSETTE GRASS, CEDAR PANIC. Plant 25–60 cm tall;
lower leaf sheaths rather sparsely ascending-pilose, the upper pubescent or glabrous except on
margins; leaf blades pubescent on upper surface, glabrous or nearly so on lower, with a few long
                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1301




 Panicum hallii var. filipes [USB]   Panicum hallii var. hallii [HI1]                      Panicum hians [GO1]




    Panicum hillmanii [HEA]            Panicum laxiflorum [USB]                         Panicum linearifolium [USB]




Paniucum malacophyllum [USB]          Panicum miliaceum [USB]                             Panicum obtusum [HI1]
1302 POACEAE/PANICUM

marginal hairs near base; ligule of hairs usually 0.3–1 mm long. Rocky limestone slopes; Bell,
Bosque, Burnet, and McLennan cos.; s part of nc TX sw through Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun, oc-
casionally again late summer–fall. [Dichanthelium pedicellatum (Vasey) Gould]

Panicum philadelphicum Benth. ex Trin., (of Philadelphia), PHILADELPHIA WITCH GRASS, WOOD
WITCH GRASS. Tufted annual 20–50(–60) cm tall; leaf sheaths with papilla-based hairs; leaf
blades variously pubescent to nearly glabrous; ligule a fringe of hairs 0.5–1.5 mm long; panicles
usually 1/3–1/2 as broad as long. Sandy or gravelly soils; Dallas Co. (Reverchon 1842, MO—
Zuloaga & Morrone 1996); mainly e TX. Summer–early fall. Jones et al. (1997) treated this taxon
as [P. capillare var. sylvaticum Torr.].

Panicum ravenelii Scribn. & Merr., (for Henry William Ravenel, 1814–1887, botanist and planter
of South Carolina). Similar to P. oligosanthes; culms 30–80 cm long; leaf sheaths short-pilose;
leaf blades densely pubescent beneath, pilose toward base on upper surface and on margins.
Sandy woods; Dallas and Lamar cos.; mainly se and e TX. Apr–Jun, again late summer–fall.
[Dichanthelium ravenelii (Scribn. & Merr.) Gould]

Panicum rigidulum Bosc ex Nees, (somewhat rigid), RED-TOP PANIC. Clump-forming perennial
30–125 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous or sometimes hispid; leaf blades glabrous or sparsely his-
pid; ligule a ragged, ciliate, short membrane, 0.5–1 mm long; spikelets rather crowded along
panicle branches. Damp sandy woods and thickets, disturbed sites; Dallas, Lamar, Limestone,
and Milam cos.; se and e TX w locally to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct. [P. agrostoides
Spreng.] A number of varieties are often recognized in this species (e.g., Lelong 1984; Kartesz
1994; Jones et al. 1997); however, all nc TX material seems to be of the type variety. Lelong (1986)
gave a key separating four varieties.

Panicum scoparium Lam., (broom-like), VELVET ROSETTE GRASS. Culms course, tall, to ca. 150 cm;
leaf sheaths usually velvety-pubescent; spikelets 2.2–2.8 mm long. Sandy woods and low areas;
Lamar Co.; e TX w to ne part of nc TX. May–Jun, also fall. [Dichanthelium scoparium (Lam.) Gould]

Panicum sphaerocarpon Elliott, (spherical-fruited), ROUND-SEED ROSETTE GRASS, ROUND-SEED
PANIC. Culms 20–80 cm tall; similar to glabrous forms of P. acuminatum var. lindheimeri; ligule
minute or apparently absent; spikelets 1.4–2 mm long. Sandy soils, shaded or open areas;
throughout most of TX except nw part. Late Mar–Jun, again late summer–fall. [Dichanthelium
sphaerocarpon (Elliott) Gould]

Panicum virgatum L., (twiggy, wand-like), SWITCH GRASS. Large rhizomatous perennial 0.6–2(–3)
m tall; nodes glabrous; leaf blades 3–15 mm wide; leaf sheaths usually glabrous; ligule a fringed
membrane 1.5–3 mm long; panicles large, usually 15–55 cm long; spikelets acuminate-pointed,
2.8–5 mm long. Low moist areas and prairies; throughout TX. Aug–Nov. A member of the origi-
nal tall grass prairie; considered one of the “big four” tall grasses along with Andropogon
gerardii, Schizachyrium scoparium, and Sorghastrum nutans; seen in two growth forms: 1) LOW-
LAND SWITCH GRASS—very large isolated clumps often nearly 2(–3) m tall, usually in low moist
areas, and 2) UPLAND SWITCH GRASS—in dryer sites, shorter not apparently clumped individuals
with culms more scattered along the creeping rhizomes. Davis et al. (1995) pointed out addi-
tional differences and suggested the variation is possibly worthy of taxonomic recognition.

                       PASCOPYRUM WESTERN WHEAT GRASS
AA monotypic genus of w North America (J. Wipff, pers. comm.). (subfamily Pooideae, tribe
Triticeae)
REFERENCES: Dewey 1975, 1983; Löve 1980; Gupta & Baum 1989.

Pascopyrum smithii (Rydb.) Á. Löve, (for its discoverer, Charles Eastwick Smith, 1820–1900),
                                                                                     ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1303




Panicum oligosanthes var. scribnerianum [USB]           Panicum pedicellatum [USB]                   Panicum philadelphicum [USB]




                            Panicum ravenelii [BB2]                                     Panicum rigidulum [RCA]




                              Panicum scoparium [HI1]                                                Panicum sphaerocarpon [HI1]
1304 POACEAE/PASPALIDIUM

WESTERN WHEAT GRASS, BLUESTEM WHEAT GRASS. Rhizomatous erect perennial 35–100 cm tall;
foliage glaucous, blue-green; leaf sheaths glabrous, auricled at summit; leaf blades noticeably
scabrous on upper surface; ligule a short membrane; spikes slender, often dense, 6–20 cm long,
erect, the internodes of the spike axis flattened but thick; spikelets in a zigzag arrangement on
opposite sides of the spike axis, sessile, oriented so that their broadest dimension (not the keels
of glumes) is toward the spike axis, awnless or short-awned, 1 or 2 per node, 5–12-flowered, dis-
articulating above glumes; n = 56. Prairies and roadsides, low areas; Archer, Clay, Comanche,
Denton, and Jack cos.; nc TX s and w to w TX. [Agropyron smithii Rydb., Elymus smithii (Rydb.)
Gould, Elytrigia smithii (Rydb.) Nevski] This species has been variously treated in Agropyron,
Elymus, Elytrigia, or Pascopyrum. According to Dewey (1975), it is an octoploid that probably
originated through hybridization between Elytrigia dasytachya and Elymus triticoides with
subsequent chromosome doubling. While recognized in the genus Elytrigia by Dewey (1983), it
is quite distinct morphologically from other members of the Triticeae, is unique cytogeneti-
cally, and doesn’t fit well into any of the traditional genera. Further, there are nomenclatural
problems with Elytrigia (J. Wipff, pers. comm.). For these reasons, we are following Löve (1980)
and Kartesz (1994) in recognizing it in the monotypic genus Pascopyrum.

                                        PASPALIDIUM
AA mainly tropical genus of ca. 30–40 species with a number of Australian endemics (Crins
1991; Mabberley 1987); related to and sometimes lumped with Setaria (e.g., Mabberley 1997).
(Greek diminutive of Paspalum, in reference to a similarity to that genus) (subfamily
Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Crins 1991; Webster 1995.

Paspalidium geminatum (Forssk.) Stapf, (twin), EGYPTIAN PASPALIDIUM. Erect glabrous perennial
35–80 cm tall, rhizomatous or stoloniferous; panicles with central axis; lateral branches of
panicle 7–17, floriferous to base, appressed, with spikelets in 2 rows on the flattened branches;
spikelets 2-flowered, the lower floret sterile, with glume-like lemma, the upper floret fertile,
with hardened grain-like lemma; first glume broad, rounded to truncate, 1/4–1/3 as long as
spikelet; second glume resembling sterile lemma. Shallow water or wet ground; Dallas and
Grayson cos., also McLennan Co. (Mahler 1988); mainly se and e TX w to nc TX, also Wichita
Co. (Mahler 1988) in e Rolling Plains. May–Aug. Sometimes placed in the genus Panicum [as P.
geminatum Forssk.] or in Setaria [as S. geminata (Forssk.) Veldkamp] (Webster 1995). Gould
(1975b) and Godfrey and Wooten (1979) treated this species as native indicating it occurred in
both the Old and New Worlds; however, Crins (1991) considered it introduced and naturalized
in the s U.S.; S. Hatch (pers. comm.) agrees with Crins. I

                                           PASPALUM
Perennials (our species); ligule a membrane; inflorescences with a central axis and 1–many,
spike-like, unilateral branches; spikelets subsessile or short-pedicelled on one side of a flat-
tened branch, lanceolate to nearly circular, flattened on one face, 2-flowered, the lower floret
sterile or staminate, the upper floret perfect; lower glume usually reduced or absent; upper
glume and sterile lemma similar to each other; fertile lemma firm or hardened, usually smooth
and shiny with firm inrolled margins.
AA genus of ca. 330 species of tropical and warm areas of the world, especially the Americas.
Some are characteristic of the pampas; P. pyramidale Nees grows to 15 m tall in the Amazon.
Ergot fungi, Claviceps purpurea (Fr.: Fr.) Tul., C. paspali F. Stevens & J.G. Hall, and related spe-
cies, are known to grow on a number of Texas grasses including P. dilatatum and other
Paspalum species. These fungi, whose overwintering structures (= sclerotia) replace some grains
                                                                                           PASPALUM/POACEAE 1305

in the grass inflorescence, often produce toxic alkaloids (e.g., ergocryptine and ergotamine)
chemically similar to LSD; cattle can develop gangrene, have convulsions, or die after ingestion;
significant livestock losses have occurred; humans can also be affected (see discussion under
the genus Secale) (Sperry et al. 1955; Kingsbury 1964, 1965). (Probably from the Greek paspalos,
millet or meal) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Chase 1929; Silveus 1942; Banks 1966; Allred 1982; Crins 1991.

1. Spikelets with long hairs around the margin, glabrous or short-pubescent on the faces; glume
   and sterile lemma abruptly pointed beyond the blunt fruit.
   2. Spikelets 1.8–2.2 mm wide; inflorescence branches (racemes) 2–8                                     P. dilatatum
   2. Spikelets 1.1–1.4 mm wide; inflorescence branches 7–36                                                  P. urvillei
1. Spikelets glabrous or uniformly short- or long-pubescent; glume and sterile lemma not abruptly
   pointed beyond the fruit.
   3. Spikelets 3.6–4.8 mm long                                                                         P. floridanum
   3. Spikelets 1.6–3.5 mm long.
      4. Inflorescence branches 2, paired or less than 1 cm apart (1–2 additional branches occasion-
         ally present below); spikelets 2.7–3.5 mm long.
         5. Plants usually of upland habitats; culms erect, not rooting at the nodes; spikelets usually
            broadly ovate to broadly obovate (rarely elliptic), usually blunt or broadly acute at apex,
            usually 2.8–3.5 mm long; first glume always absent                                              P. notatum
       5. Plants of wet habitats; culms decumbent, rooting at the nodes; spikelets elliptic, usually
         tapering to a short acute apex, usually 2.7–3 mm long; minute first glume usually present
                                                                                                          P. distichum
     4. Inflorescence branches 1–numerous, when 2, the branches 1–2 cm or more apart; spikelets
        1.6–3 mm long.
        6. First glume present on some or all spikelets (usually 1/4–1/3 as long as spikelet); second
           glume and sterile lemma usually with brownish glandular blotches; plants without rhi-
           zomes; in nc TX known only from Tarrant Co.                                                         P. langei
        6. First glume absent on all spikelets (sterile lemma of lower floret resembles second glume)
           or minute first glume present (P. distichum); second glume and sterile lemma without
           brownish glandular blotches; plants with or without rhizomes; widespread in nc TX.
           7. Lemma and palea of fertile florets dark brown and shiny at maturity; sterile lemma
              usually with transverse wrinkles along the margin                                          P. plicatulum
           7. Lemma and palea of fertile florets green, light brown, or straw-colored at maturity;
              sterile lemma usually without wrinkles.
              8. Spikelets 2.4–3.4 mm long, markedly longer than wide to ca. as wide as long; culms
                 partly decumbent, the longer rooting at the nodes OR erect, not rooting at the
                 nodes.
                 9. Spikelets 1.1–1.4 mm wide, one of each pair with a minute lower glume                 P. distichum
                 9. Spikelets 1.4–3.2 mm wide, without lower glume.
                    10. Spikelets 1.4–1.8 mm wide, elliptic to obovate, pubescent or glabrous, in pairs
                        in 4 rows or in 2 rows by abortion of upper spikelet of spikelet pairs; culms
                        usually decumbent below and rooting at lower nodes                              P. pubiflorum
                    10. Spikelets 2–3.2 mm wide, broadly ovate, broadly obovate, or nearly orbicular,
                        glabrous, borne singly in 2 rows; culms erect, not rooting in lower portion             P. laeve
              8. Spikelets 1.6–2.2 mm long, ca. as wide as long; culms erect, not rooting at lower
                 nodes                                                                                     P. setaceum

Paspalum dilatatum Poir., (dialated, widened, expanded), DALLIS GRASS, PASPALUM GRASS. Clump-
forming perennial; culms low-spreading to erect, 25–120 cm long; lower leaf sheaths pilose, the
upper glabrous except at summit; inflorescences of 2–8 branches, the branches 3–8 cm long.
1306 POACEAE/PASPALUM

Abundant weed in disturbed sites, lawns, and roadsides; throughout TX. May–Nov. Native of
South America. Ergot alkaloids can be present—see generic synopsis. I

Paspalum distichum L., (two-spiked), KNOT GRASS, ETERNITY GRASS, JOINT GRASS, FORT THOMPSON
GRASS. Perennial 20–60 cm tall, with trailing and rooting culms sometimes several meters long;
leaf sheaths usually glabrous or pilose; inflorescences of 2, occasionally 3–4 branches, the
branches ca. 2–6 cm long; second glume minutely pubescent. Moist or wet areas along ponds,
lakes, and streams; Bell, Dallas, Ellis, and Grayson cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); throughout
TX. Jun–Oct. [P. distichum var. indutum Shinners] While some authorities recognize var.
indutum (e.g., Jones et al. 1997), we are following Allred (1982) and J. Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997)
in lumping this variety.

Paspalum floridanum Michx., (of Florida), FLORIDA PASPALUM, BIG FLORIDA PASPALUM, BIG
PASPALUM. Rhizomatous perennial; culms erect, 1–2 m tall; leaf sheaths and blades nearly or
completely glabrous or ± densely hirsute; inflorescences usually of 2–5 branches, the branches
4–13 cm long; spikelets glabrous. Grasslands and open woodlands; se and e TX w to East Cross
Timbers, also Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov. [Paspalum floridanum var. glabratum Engelm. ex
Vasey] Jones et al. (1997) recognized var. glabratum.

Paspalum laeve Michx., (smooth). Tufted perennial to ca. 100 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous to
pilose, inflorescences of (2–)3–6 branches, the branches usually 4–10 cm long. Prairies, open
woods, disturbed or moist areas, often on sand. Jul–Oct.

1. Spikelets 2.7–3.2 mm wide, ca. as wide as long                                        var. circulare
1. Spikelets 2–2.5 mm wide, conspicuously longer than wide                                    var. laeve

var. circulare (Nash) Fernald, (circular), ROUND-SEED PASPALUM. Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly se
and e TX.

var. laeve, FIELD PASPALUM, SMOOTH PASPALUM. Lamar Co. (Carr 1994) in Red River drainage;
mainly se and e TX.

Paspalum langei (E. Fourn.) Nash, (for Johann Martin Christian Lange, 1818–1898, Danish bota-
nist), RUSTY-SEED PASPALUM, LANGE’S PASPALUM. Cespitose perennial 30–100 cm tall; leaf blades 7–
18 mm broad, often marginally crisped; inflorescences with 2–5 branches, the branches usually
4–8 cm long; spikelets 2.2–2.6 mm long; first glume present on some or all spikelets; second glume
and sterile lemma pubescent. Shaded ditchbanks; Tarrant Co.; mainly se and e TX. Apr–Nov.

Paspalum notatum Flüggé, (marked), BAHIA GRASS. Rhizomatous perennial; culms erect, usually
20–75 cm tall; inflorescences usually of 2(–3) spicate branches, the branches 4–12(–15) cm long,
paired or one slightly below other; spikelets broadly ovate or broadly obovate (rarely elliptic),
glabrous. Introduced as a pasture grass and for erosion control; sandy loam, forest openings, and
roadsides. Jun–Nov. Native to Latin America. I

1. Spikelets 3.3–4 mm long, 2.3–3 mm wide; inflorescences of 2(–3–4) primary branches   var. latiflorum
1. Spikelets 2.5–3.2 mm long, ca. 2 mm wide; inflorescences of 4–5 primary branches          var. saurae

var. latiflorum Döll, (broad-flowered). Grayson, Limestone, and Tarrant cos.; mainly e and s TX,
also Edwards Plateau. I

var. saurae Parodi, (derivation unclear, possibly from Greek: sauros, lizard). Introduced into the
U.S. as PENSACOLA BAHIA GRASS. Possibly present in nc TX but no specimens have been seen.
I

Paspalum plicatulum Michx., (plicate, folded like a fan), BROWN-SEED PASPALUM, PLAITED
PASPALUM. Tufted or clumped perennial 50–100 cm tall; inflorescences usually of 3–10 branches
                                                                    ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1307




     Panicum virgatum [RCA]             Pascopyrum smithii [USB]                     Paspalidium geminatum [HI1]




    Paspalum dilatatum [HI1]            Paspalum distichum [MAS]                    Paspalum floridanum [USB]




Paspalum laeve var. circulare [BB2]   Paspalum laeve var. laeve [RCA]                 Paspalum langei [HI1]
1308 POACEAE/PENNISETUM

each commonly 3–10 cm long; spikelets 2.4–2.8 mm long; glume glabrous or minutely pubes-
cent. Sand or sandy loam, often in open woods; Milam Co. at the e edge of nc TX; mainly se and
e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–Nov.

Paspalum pubiflorum Rupr., (hairy-flowered). Perennial with culms decumbent below, often
rooting at the lower nodes, usually 40–80 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous or the lower pilose; in-
florescences of 2–5(–7) branches, the branches usually 3–10 cm long; spikelets glabrous or pu-
bescent. Ditches and other moist areas. Mainly May–Nov.

1. Spikelets glabrous                                                                       var. glabrum
1. Spikelets pubescent                                                                   var. pubiflorum

var. glabrum Vasey ex Scribn., (smooth, without hairs), SMOOTH-SEED PASPALUM. Collin and
Cooke cos., also Parker, Rockwall, and Tarrant cos. (Gould 1975b); reported from vegetational
areas 1, 3, 4, 7, and 8 (Fig. 2) by Gould (1975b) and Hatch et al. (1990) but supposedly much less
frequent in TX than var. pubiflorum (Gould 1975b).

var. pubiflorum. HAIRY-SEED PASPALUM, HAIRY-FLOWER PASPALUM. Included based on citation of
vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); throughout most of TX.

Paspalum setaceum Michx., (bristle-like), THIN PASPALUM. Clump-forming perennial; culms 20–
100 cm long; leaf sheaths and blades pilose to glabrous except on margins, often with fine pu-
bescence with or instead of long hairs; inflorescences of 1–5 branches, the branches 3–17 cm
long; spikelets glabrous or pubescent. Disturbed sites, roadsides; throughout TX. May–Oct. [P.
ciliatifolium Michx., P. stramineum Nash, P. setaceum Michx. var caliatifolium (Michx.) Vasey,
P. setaceum Michx. var. stramineum (Nash) D.J. Banks, P. setaceum Michx. var. muhlenbergii
(Nash) D.J. Banks] Banks (1966) divided this species into a number of varieties.

Paspalum urvillei Steud., (for its discoverer, Jules Sébastien Cesar Dumont d’Urville, 1790–1842,
French hydrographer and explorer), VASEY GRASS, URVILLE’S PASPALUM. Clump-forming peren-
nial; culms erect or bent at base, 50–200 cm tall; lower leaf sheaths densely short-bristly with
fine, stiff hairs that catch and stick to the skin when touched; upper leaf sheaths glabrous; in-
florescences of 7–36 erect branches, the branches 4–10(–14) cm long. Low disturbed areas;
Denton, Grayson, Kaufman, and Tarrant cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); se and e TX w to nc
TX, also Edwards Plateau. Late May–Oct. Native of South America. I

                                          PENNISETUM
AA genus of 130 species of tropical and warm areas of the world; some are used as fodders,
lawn grasses, and for their grains. A number of Pennisetum species including P. alopecuroides
(L.) Spreng., P. americanum (L.) Leeke, P. ciliare (L.) Link, P. macrostachyum Trin., and P. setaceum
(Forssk.) Chiov. (FOUNTAIN GRASS) are cultivated as ornamentals for their large and showy inflo-
rescences and may long persist vegetatively. (Latin: penna, a feather, and seta, a bristle, referring
to the feathery bristles around the spikelets) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Chase 1921; Crins 1991.
Pennisetum villosum R. Br. ex Fresen., (softly hairy), FEATHERTOP. Perennial, tufted, 20–70 cm
tall; leaf sheaths glabrous except on margins and summit; ligule a ciliate membrane with hairs
ca. 1 mm long; inflorescence a spike-like contracted panicle, tan or yellowish, feathery, 4–10 cm
long, with conspicuous fascicles of bristles 2–5 cm long, the inner bristles plumose with silky
hairs; bristles separate to base, disarticulating with spikelets; spikelet one per fascicle of bristles,
8–9 mm long, of 2 florets, the lower floret sterile with glume-like lemma, the upper floret fer-
tile. Cultivated as an ornamental, tending to persist or a transitory escape; Dallas and Parker
cos. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); Hatch et al. (1990) also cited vegetational areas 3 and 10 (Fig. 2).
Jun–Oct. Native of Africa (Ethiopia). I
                                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1309




                                             Paspalum plicatulum [USB]                 Paspalum pubiflorum var. glabrum [BB2]




    Paspalum notatum var. latifolium [HEA]




                                                                                                 Paspalum urvillei [HI1]


                                             Paspalum setaceum [RCA]




Paspalum pubiflorum var. pubiflorum [GO1]




                                                                           Pennisetum villosum [BA1]
1310 POACEAE/PHALARIS

Pennisetum ciliare (L.) Link, (ciliate, fringed with hairs), (BUFFEL GRASS) [Cenchrus ciliaris L.],
an Old World species introduced into s TX as a forage grass, is cited by Hatch et al. (1990) for
vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) but apparently occurs on to the s of nc TX. It resembles a Setaria in
having short bristles (4–10 mm long), but these are united at the base and the bur (bristles and
spikelet) falls as a unit, whereas in Setaria the spikelets disarticulate above the bristles. This
species, which was introduced in the 1940s by the Soil Conservation Service, is now a problem-
atic invader of native habitats in some parts of sw North America (Tellman 1997). I

                                    PHALARIS CANARY GRASS
Glabrous-erect-tufted annuals; inflorescence a very dense, tightly contracted, ovoid or spike-
like panicle; spikelets sessile, strongly laterally compressed, with 1 terminal perfect floret and 2
sterile reduced or scale-like lemmas below; glumes keeled and winged in upper half, ± equal,
awnless; fertile lemma appressed-pubescent, awnless; rachilla disarticulating above glumes,
the sterile lemmas falling with the fertile one; caryopsis plump.
AA genus of ca. 20 species native to Europe, the Mediterranean, n Asia, and the Americas;
some are valuable as fodder. (Ancient Greek name for a grass) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe
Aveneae)
REFERENCE: Anderson 1961.

1. Caryopses (= fruits) 1.7–2.3 mm long; glumes 4.2–6(–6.7) mm long; reduced lemmas 1.5–2.5 mm
   long, 1/3–1/2 as long as fertile lemma; fertile lemmas 3–4.7 mm long; native species widespread
   in nc TX                                                                                        P. caroliniana
1. Caryopses 3.9–4.2 mm long; glumes 7–9 mm long; reduced lemmas 2.5–4.5 mm long, more than
   1/2 as long as single fertile lemma; fertile lemmas 4.5–6.8 mm long; rare introduced species    P. canariensis

Phalaris canariensis L., (of the Canary Islands), CANARY GRASS. Culms 25–70(–100) cm tall;
ligule a membrane 2–6 mm long; leaf blades 5–15(–20+) cm long, 3–10 mm wide; panicles short,
thick, 1.5–3(–4) cm long, 10–18 mm wide; glumes glabrous or sparsely hispid, ± pale with dark
green along the lateral nerves. Waste areas, probably coming up from discarded bird seed; Bell,
Coryell (HPC), and Brown (Stanford 1971) cos.; also se and e TX and Edwards Plateau. Mar–Jun.
Native of the w Mediterranean. Important as a source of commercial bird feed; this is the ca-
nary seed of commerce (Gould 1975b; Mabberley 1987). I

Phalaris caroliniana Walter, (of Carolina), WILD CANARY GRASS, CAROLINA CANARY GRASS,
SOUTHERN CANARY GRASS. Culms usually 25–70(–100) cm tall; ligule a membrane 1–5 mm long;
leaf blades 6–15(–20) cm long, 3–10(–13) mm wide; panicles cylindrical to narrowly elliptical in
outline, spike-like, usually up to 6(–12) cm long, 8–13(–20) mm wide; glumes with lateral
nerves glabrous or scabrous with 5 or less spicules. Moist areas, ravines, disturbed sites;
throughout TX. Apr–Jun.

Some individuals of P. caroliniana have elongate inflorescences up to 12 cm long (Whitehouse
15711, Dallas Co., BRIT/SMU) reminiscent of P. angusta Nees ex Trin. The latter species has inflo-
rescences 6–15 cm long, 8–10 mm thick, culms to 1.5 m tall, glumes mostly 3.5–4 mm long, and
lateral nerves of glumes scabrous with 9 or more spicules. While known just to the e of nc TX
in vegetational areas 1, 2, and 3 (Hatch et al. 1990), we have no definite reports of P. angusta from
nc TX.

                              PHLEUM TIMOTHY, CAT-TAIL GRASS
AA genus of 15 species of temperate Eurasia, North America, and temperate South America
including cultivated forage grasses. (Greek: phleos, a kind of reed) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe
Poeae)
                                                                        PHRAGMITES/POACEAE 1311

REFERENCE: Piper & Bort 1915.

Phleum pratense L., (of meadows), TIMOTHY. Clump-forming perennial 30–100(–120) cm tall,
glabrous except for scabrous leaf-blades; ligule a membrane 3–6 mm long; inflorescence a slen-
der, dense, cylindrical, pencil-like spike usually 5–9 cm long and 5–9 mm thick; spikelets
strongly compressed, 1-flowered; glumes with coarsely ciliate keel, abruptly short awned; lem-
mas awnless. Collected at Dallas in 1874 by Reverchon (whether wild or cultivated not
known), and along railroad at Mineola, Wood Co. in e TX, in Jun, 1900 (Mahler 1988). Native of
Eurasia. A cool-climate pasture grass, not now cultivated in nc TX except experimentally; a
common cause of hay fever where cultivated. I

                                        PHRAGMITES
AA cosmopolitan genus of 3 species. (Greek: phragmites, growing in hedges, apparently from
its hedge-like growth along ditches) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Arundineae)
REFERENCE: Clayton 1968.

Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud., (southern), COMMON REED, REED, NAL, DANUBE GRASS.
Rhizomatous perennial; culms 2–4 m tall, usually unbranched; leaf blades mostly 1.5–6 cm
wide; panicles densely flowered, 15–40 cm long; spikelets 10–15 mm long, usually with 4–8 flo-
rets; rachilla joints long hairy, the hairs to 10 mm or more long; glumes and lemmas glabrous.
Wet areas of ponds, low areas, and roadsides, usually tight clay soils; Grayson and Kaufman cos.;
throughout TX. Native of North America, South America, Eurasia, Africa, and Australia. Mostly
Jul–Nov. [P. communis Trin.] The grains were eaten by Native Americans (Mabberley 1987).

                                PHYLLOSTACHYS BAMBOO
AA genus of 55 species of BAMBOOS native from the Himalayas to Japan, especially China; of-
ten forming thickets by spreading rhizomes; includes most frequently cultivated hardy BAM-
BOOS; species variously used for paper, timber, fishing rods, edible shoots, and cultivated orna-
mentals. (Greek: phyllum, a leaf, and stachys, a spike, referring to the leafy inflorescences)
(subfamily Bambusoideae, tribe Bambuseae)
REFERENCE: Borowski et al. 1996.

Phyllostachys aurea Carriére ex Riviére & C. Riviére, (golden), GOLDEN BAMBOO, FISHPOLE BAM-
BOO, YELLOW BAMBOO. Woody rhizomatous perennial forming extensive colonies; culms 2–8 m
tall, glabrous, green to yellowish, flattened on 1 side above point on node where branches origi-
nate; branches 2(–3) per node, 1 of these larger than the other; leaf blades narrowly lanceolate,
5–12(–15) cm long, 1–2 cm wide, basally cuneate to rounded, apically acuminate, glabrous on
both surfaces except with short pubescence along midvein near attachment to petiole, the mar-
gins entire to scaberulous, with a short but distinct petiole ca. 3–5 mm long; leaf sheaths gla-
brous except for 2 tufts of bristles at apex; flowers or fruits usually not seen. Widely cultivated
in TX; persists and spreads vegetatively; can cover large areas; several extensive colonies spread-
ing on sandy soils in n Grayson Co., also Tarrant Co.; also Bell, Bosque, Callahan, Collin, Dallas,
Erath, Kaufman, Limestone, McLennan, Palo Pinto, Parker, and Williamson cos. (Borowski et al.
1996). Borowski et al. (1996) documented the occurrence of this species in TX. We have observed
only one flowering collection from nc TX; Phyllostachys species generally flower only after in-
tervals of many years. Native of China. [Bambusa aurea Hort] I

A variety of other exotic bamboos, including Bambusa species and additional species of
Phyllostachys are cultivated in nc TX (e.g., P. nigra (Lodd.) Munro, BLACK BAMBOO, with black
culms). Our only native bamboo, Arundinaria gigantea, is limited to the extreme ne portion of
nc TX.
1312 POACEAE/POA

                                              POA BLUE GRASS
Annuals or perennials; tips of leaf blades sometimes cupped; ligule a membrane; panicles open
or contracted; spikelets relatively small, usually with 2–6(–10) florets, awnless, disarticulating
above glumes and between florets; lemmas acute or obtuse, rounded or keeled on back, often
with long, kinky hairs at base.
AA genus of 200+ species of temperate and cold areas of the world including tropical moun-
tains; some are important pasture and lawn grasses. (Ancient Greek name for grass or fodder)
(subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)
REFERENCE: Marsh 1952.

1. Florets developing into bulbils (often dark purple at base) with lemmas prolonged to 5–15 mm
   long as if sprouting; culms swollen at base; rare in TX, known only from Denton Co.                      P. bulbosa
1. Florets not developing into bulbils; culms not swollen at base; including species widespread in
   nc TX.
   2. Plants annual, 3–45 cm tall; keel of glumes not scabrous-ciliate (P. annua) or minutely sca-
      brous-ciliate (P. chapmaniana).
      3. Lemmas with long, kinky, cobwebby hairs at base, with 3 strong and 2 faint nerves; anthers
         0.1–0.2 mm long; rare in nc TX                                                             P. chapmaniana
      3. Lemmas usually without long hairs at base (but long-pubescent on margins and keel, with
         5 strong nerves; anthers 0.5–1.3 mm long; widespread in nc TX                                        P. annua
   2. Plants perennial, 15–100 cm tall; keel of glumes minutely to strongly scabrous-ciliate.
      4. Plants with slender creeping rhizomes; lemmas acute or with awn-like tip, pubescent only
         on keel or marginal nerves; inflorescences tightly contracted to somewhat spreading, ±
         densely flowered; in various habitats including grasslands and other open areas.
         5. Culms and basal leaf sheaths strongly flattened, sharply keeled                             P. compressa
         5. Culms and basal leaf sheaths terete or only slightly flattened, not sharply keeled.
            6. Lower lemmas 3.9–6.4 mm long; plants dioecious; lowest node of inflorescences
               usually with (4–)5 branches; native species widespread in nc TX                         P. arachnifera
            6. Lower lemmas usually 2.5–3.2 mm long; plants not dioecious, the florets perfect;
               lowest node of inflorescences usually with (2–)3–4 branches; introduced species known
               in nc TX only from Cooke and Lamar cos.                                                    P. pratensis
      4. Plants without rhizomes; lemmas subacute or obtuse, often pubescent over the surface, at
         least on lower part; inflorescence branches widely spreading, loosely flowered; in wooded
         habitats                                                                                         P. sylvestris

Poa annua L., (annual, yearly), ANNUAL BLUEGRASS, LOW SPEAR GRASS, DWARF MEADOW GRASS.
Glabrous annual; panicles small, compact, erect; lemmas long-pubescent on margins and keel.
Disturbed sites; throughout TX. Mar–May, occasionally as early as late Fall. Native of Europe. I

Poa arachnifera Torr., (spider-bearing, its long white hairs giving the appearance of a spider
web), TEXAS BLUE GRASS. Sod-forming, glabrous perennial 20–60 cm tall; panicles dense, rather
narrow, erect; florets unisexual, the sexes on different plants; lemmas of pistillate spikelets with
long-ciliate keel and dense basal tuft of long, cobwebby hairs; lemmas of staminate spikelets
with keel inconspicuously ciliate toward base and rather sparse basal tuft of cobwebby hairs.
Calcareous or sandy clay prairies and oak openings; in much of e 1/2 of TX. Late Mar–Apr. Fre-
quent in original prairie, though not abundant; increases under light disturbance, disappears
early under heavy grazing.

Poa bulbosa L., (bulbous), BULBOUS BLUE GRASS. Densely tufted, glabrous perennial 20–50 cm
tall; culms swollen at base; florets usually developing into asexual bulbils often dark purple at
base; lemmas glabrous, strongly nerved, the tips prolonged as if sprouting. Spreading from cul-
                                                                   ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1313




Phalaris canariensis [GO1, PBL]       Phalaris caroliniana [USB]                      Phleum pratense [HI1]




    Phragmites australis [REE]        Phyllostachys aurea [KEW]                       Poa annua [USB]




         乆           么




么                                 乆
      Poa arachnifera [USB]                Poa bulbosa [HI1]                        Poa chapmaniana [USB]
1314 POACEAE/POLYPOGON

tivation at Denton Agricultural Experiment Station (Shinners 1958a); otherwise unknown in
TX. Apr–May. Native of Europe. I

Poa chapmaniana Scribn., (for Alvin Wenthworth Chapman, 1809–1899, Florida botanist),
CHAPMAN’S POA, CHAPMAN’S BLUE GRASS. Annual to ca. 30 cm tall; similar to P. annua, sometimes
difficult to distinguish and possibly not specifically distinct from that species; spikelets with
cleistogamous florets. Lawns, field, and roadsides; included based on citation of vegetational ar-
eas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Gould (1975b); otherwise reported in TX only from e TX (Gould 1975b).
Late fall–spring.

Poa compressa L., (flattened), CANADA BLUE GRASS. Rhizomatous perennial 10–60(–80) cm tall;
culms and basal leaf sheaths strongly flattened, sharply keeled; panicle branches appressed or
only slightly spreading; lemmas with or without long hairs at base. Cultivated as a forage grass,
escaping?; included based on citation for vegetational area 5 (Fig. 2) by Gould (1975b); otherwise
reported in TX (Gould 1975b; Hatch et al. 1990) only from vegetational areas 6, 9, and 10 (Fig. 2).
Apr–Jun. Native of Europe. I

Poa pratensis L., (of meadows), KENTUCKY BLUE GRASS, JUNE BLUE GRASS. Sod-forming, glabrous
perennial 15–100 cm tall; panicles typically rather loose, with at least the lower branches
spreading; lemmas pubescent on keel and marginal nerves, cobwebby at base. Disturbed areas,
also appearing occasionally in lawns; Lamar Co., also Cooke Co. (Mahler 1988); scattered in n
and w TX. May. Native of the Old World (despite the common name) and possibly also to the
northern mountainous areas of North America (Gould 1975b; Sutherland 1986). It is one of the
most popular lawn grasses in cooler parts of the country; a number of lawn and pasture strains
have been introduced into the U.S. (Gould 1975b; Sutherland 1986). According to Cory (1950),
this species was first collected in n TX in 1949. I

Poa sylvestris A. Gray, (of woodland), WOODLAND BLUE GRASS, SYLVAN BLUE GRASS. Tufted peren-
nial 40–100 cm tall; panicles open, erect, the lower branches reflexed in age. Woods in lime-
stone ravines, low woods; Fannin and Grayson cos. in Red River drainage, also Dallas Co.
(Mahler 1988), not collected there recently; otherwise only far e TX. Apr–May.

                                            POLYPOGON
Annuals or perennials; ligule a membrane; inflorescence a dense, contracted panicle; spikelets
small, 1-flowered; glumes falling with rest of spikelet; lemma 1/2–3/4 times as long as the
glumes; palea equaling the lemma.
AA genus of 10 species of warm temperate areas and tropical mountains. (Greek: polys, much,
and pogon, beard, presumably because of the conspicuous awns of some species) (subfamily
Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)

1. Glumes long awned (awns 5–9 mm long); plants annual                             P. monspeliensis
1. Glumes awnless; plants perennial                                                        P. viridis

Polypogon monspeliensis (L.) Desf., (of Montpellier in s France), RABBIT’S-FOOT, ANNUAL BEARD
GRASS, BEARD GRASS, RABBIT’S-FOOT GRASS. Plant 15–75 cm tall, largely glabrous; ligules 4–10 mm
long; inflorescences appearing bristly-woolly because of long yellowish awns, ca. 2–15 cm long,
1–2.5 cm broad; spikelets 1.5–2 mm long (not counting conspicuous awns of glumes). Low areas,
sometimes in shallow water; throughout TX. Late May–Jul. Native of Europe. I

Polypogon viridis (Gouan) Breistr., (green), WATER BENT GRASS. Plant glabrous; culms bent at base
or trailing, 15–45(–70) cm long; ligules 2–7 mm long; inflorescences 4–12 cm long, 1–3 cm
broad; spikelets 1.3–2(–2.5) mm long, awnless. About springs and in creek beds; Bell and Burnet
                                                                                      SACCHARUM/POACEAE 1315

cos.; s part of nc TX s and w to w TX. Apr–Jul. Native to Mediterranean region. [Agrostis
semiverticillata (Forssk.) C. Chr., P. semiverticillatus (Forssk.) Hyl.] I

                          SACCHARUM PLUME GRASS, SUGARCANE
Large, stout, reed-like perennials; leaf blades elongate, flat; inflorescence a large, dense, often
conspicuously hairy, terminal panicle; spikelets all alike, perfect, in pairs, 1 sessile and one pedi-
cellate, 2-flowered, the upper floret fertile; inflorescence branches disarticulating below the
spikelets, the pedicels falling with the sessile spikelets; glumes large, usually with a tuft of long
hairs at base, the hairs (in our species) about as long as or longer than the spikelets; lemma of
upper floret of each spikelet with a long awn.

AThe genus, as treated here including Erianthus, has 35 species of tropical and warm areas of
the world. It includes S. officinarum L. (SUGARCANE), native to tropical se Asia, which is the
source of ca. 1/2 of the world’s sugar. (Greek: sacchar, sugar, referring to the sweet sap) (subfam-
ily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Mukherjee 1958; Gandhi & Dutton 1993; Webster & Shaw 1995.

1. Awn of lemma slightly flattened at base, loosely twisted and geniculate (= bent) below middle;
   culms usually glabrous below the inflorescence; hairs at base of spikelets ca. as long as spikelets;
   lemma of upper floret 3-nerved                                                                       S. brevibarbe
1. Awn of lemma terete (= round), straight; culms villous (= long hairy) below the inflorescence;
   hairs at base of spikelets slightly shorter to often much longer than spikelets; lemma of upper
   floret 1-nerved                                                                                      S. giganteum

Saccharum brevibarbe (Michx.) Pers. var. contortum (Elliott) R.D. Webster, (sp.: short-bearded;
var.: contorted), BENT-AWN PLUME GRASS, BEARD GRASS. Culms usually 1.5–2.5 m tall, the nodes
appressed-hispid when young, glabrous with age; ligule a membrane with hairs 1–3 mm long;
leaf blades to 80 cm or more long, usually 8–18 mm wide, scabrous; panicles 20–50 (rarely
more) cm long; spikelets 6–8 mm long (excluding awns), with basal hairs whitish or twany;
lemma awn 15–22 mm long. Usually moist, sandy soils; Hopkins and Lamar cos. in ne part of
nc TX; mainly se and e TX. Sep–Nov. We are following Webster and Shaw (1995) for nomencla-
ture of this taxon; it is sometimes recognized in the genus Erianthus [as Erianthus contortus
Baldwin]. [S. contortum (Elliott) Nutt.]

Saccharum giganteum (Walter) Pers., (gigantic), SUGARCANE PLUME GRASS. Very large; culms 1–3
m tall in dense clumps, the nodes with a dense ring of hairs 1–6 mm long; ligule and nearby
area densely villous; leaf blades to 90 cm or more long, 4–20 mm wide; panicles 10–50 cm long;
spikelets 5–8 mm long (excluding awns), with basal hairs abundant, brownish; lemma awn 12–
25 mm long. Usually moist sandy soils; Milam and Henderson cos. near e margin of nc TX;
mainly se and e TX. Sep–Nov. Sometimes recognized in the genus Erianthus [as E. giganteus
(Walter) P. Beauv.].

                                                SACCIOLEPIS
AA genus of 30 species of tropical and warm areas, especially Africa. (Greek: saccion, small
bag, and lepis, scale, referring to the saccate second glume) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe
Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Judziewicz 1990; Crins 1991.

Sacciolepis striata (L.) Nash, (striated, striped), AMERICAN CUPSCALE. Perennial rooting at creep-
ing basal nodes; culms to 1.5 m or more tall; ligule a fringed membrane < 0.5 mm long; inflores-
cence a narrowly cylindric panicle, 8–25 cm long, ca. 10–15 mm broad; spikelets on short
1316 POACEAE/SCHEDONNARDUS

pedicels, glabrous, awnless, basally asymmetrical, 3.5–5 mm long, 2-flowered, the lower stami-
nate, the upper perfect; first glume ca. 1/4 or less as the second; lower lemma about as long as
second glume; upper (perfect) lemma hardened, smooth, shiny, ca. 1.5–2 mm long. Moist sand,
pond margins; Lamar Co. in Red River drainage; mainly se and e TX. Late Aug–Nov.

             SCHEDONNARDUS TUMBLE GRASS, TEXAS CRAB GRASS
AA monotypic genus of the s U.S. Mabberley (1997) indicated that this species is a conspicuous
feature of deserted towns in Western films. (Greek: schedon, near, and Nardus, from its resem-
blance to that genus) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)

Schedonnardus paniculatus (Nutt.) Trel., (with flowers in panicles), TUMBLE GRASS, TEXAS CRAB
GRASS. Tufted perennial 8–50(–70) cm tall or long; leaves crowded toward base of plant; leaf
sheaths compressed, keeled, glabrous; leaf blades spirally twisted on drying; ligule a membrane
1–3 mm long; inflorescence as long as or longer than the leafy portion of the culm, spreading to
partly decumbent, finally breaking away and acting as a tumbleweed, the main axis becoming
loosely coiled, with a few widely spaced spicate branches. Various soils; throughout TX. A mi-
nor member of original prairie, increasing under disturbance; rather common on disturbed
sites. Apr–Oct.

                               SCHIZACHYRIUM BLUESTEM
AA mainly tropical genus of 60 species, particularly in savannas; formerly treated in a more
inclusive Andropogon. (Greek: schizo, to divide or split, and achna, chaff, referring to toothed
lemma) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Gould 1967; Carman & Briske 1985; Butler & Briske 1988; Briske & Anderson 1992.

Schizachyrium scoparium (Michx.) Nash, (broom-like), LITTLE BLUESTEM. Perennial 50–200 cm
tall, non-rhizomatous, green or glaucous; ligule a firm membrane 1–3 mm long; flowering culms
with each leafy branch terminating in a spicate raceme; racemes 2.5–5 cm long; disarticulation
at base of sessile spikelets so that associated pedicel and section of raceme fall with sessile
spikelet; spikelets in pairs, the sessile spikelets perfect, 6–8 mm long, 2-flowered, the upper fer-
tile; pedicellate spikelets staminate or neuter, narrow, shorter than sessile spikelets. Prairies and
woodland openings; nearly throughout TX. Aug–Dec. One of our most important native
grasses, often a vegetational dominant, and one of the “big four” tall grass prairie species along
with Andropogon gerardii, Panicum virgatum, and Sorghastrum nutans. [Andropogon scoparius
Michx. var. frequens F.T. Hubb., S. scoparium (Michx.) Nash var. frequens (F.T. Hubb.) Gould]

                               SCLEROCHLOA HARD GRASS
AA monotypic genus of s Europe and w Asia. (Greek: scleros, hard, and chloa, grass, referring to
thick glumes) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)
REFERENCE: Brandenburg et al. 1991b.

Sclerochloa dura (L.) P. Beauv., (durable, hard), HARD GRASS. Tufted, glabrous, prostrate to erect
annual 3–10(–18) cm tall or long; ligule a membrane 1–2 mm long; inflorescences spike-like,
dense, often 1-sided, 1–3(–4.5) cm long; spikelets ca. 3–4-flowered, usually 6–11 mm long; glumes
and lemmas blunt, prominently nerved. Roadsides, waste places, or disturbed areas; Dallas and
Ellis cos., also sometimes extensive, but local populations were found in Collin, Denton, Fannin,
Grayson, and Red River cos. in April 1998 (e.g., Rabeler & Diggs 1318); nc TX and Edwards Pla-
teau; first collected in the U.S. in 1895 and in TX in 1944 (Brandenburg et al. 1991b) Apr. Native
of Europe. I
                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1317




     Poa compressa [USB]            Poa pratensis [USB]                       Poa sylvestris [USB]




Polypogon monspeliensis [HI1]    Polypogon viridis [MAS]            Saccharum brevibarbe var. contortum [BB2]




Saccharum giganteum [HI1]       Sacciolepis striata [HI1]              Schedonnardus paniculatus [USB]
1318 POACEAE/SECALE

                                                 SECALE RYE
AAn Eurasian and s African genus of 3 species including RYE. (Ancient Latin name for rye)
(subfamily Pooideae, tribe Triticeae)
REFERENCE: Bowden 1959b.

Secale cereale L., (pertaining to agriculture, from Ceres, goddess of farming), RYE. Annual vegeta-
tively similar to WHEAT (Triticum); spikelets usually 2-flowered, both flowers perfect; glumes
narrowly lanceolate-subulate, ca. 1–3.5 mm wide, acute or acuminate, apparently 1-nerved; lem-
mas with awns 5–60 mm long. Occasionally cultivated in much of TX, chiefly in sandy soils;
found rarely as a transitory waif on roadsides or in disturbed areas; Grayson and McLennan cos.
Apr–May. RYE, an Old World species brought into domestication later than WHEAT or BARLEY, is
believed to have evolved from weeds (possibly S. montanum Guss.) invading the fields of early
WHEAT and BARLEY farmers; large fruited forms were brought into cultivation in e Turkey
(Mabberley 1987; Heiser 1990a). RYE and a number of other grasses are susceptible to infection
by ergot fungi, e.g., Claviceps purpurea (Fr.: Fr.) Tul., which through the production of LSD-like
alkaloids can cause hallucinations, psychosis, gangrene of the extremeties (due to vasoconstric-
tion), convulsions, and death in humans and livestock. The condition was referred to in ages
past as Saint Anthony’s Fire. The reference to fire resulted from the assumption that the burn-
ing sensations and blackened (gangrenous) limbs were retribution for sins. Saint Anthony, sup-
posedly with special powers to protect against fire, infection, and epilepsy, was often prayed to
for help by those with the condition. Large scale epidemics of ergotism in Europe prior to 1800,
from eating bread made with contaminated grain, resulted in 1,000s of deaths; isolated in-
stances still occur where grain purity is not controlled; ergotism is blamed by some for the hys-
teria that resulted in the Salem witch trials in 17th century Massachusetts (Kingsbury 1964;
Caporael 1976; Mabberley 1987; Matossian 1989; Blackwell 1990; Mann 1992). I

                  SETARIA BRISTLE GRASS, FOXTAIL, FOXTAIL-MILLET
Annuals or perennials; ligule a ciliate membrane; panicles usually dense, contracted, spike-like,
sometimes less dense with lower branches somewhat spreading (S. scheelei); all or at least some
spikelets subtended by an involucre of 1–several persistent bristles; spikelets disarticulating
above the bristles, awnless, of 2 florets, the lower floret sterile with glume-like lemma, the up-
per floret fertile with hardened grain-like lemma.
AA genus of ca. 150 species of tropical and warm areas; some are used for hay, pasture, silage,
or cereal grain. (Latin: seta, a bristle, referring to the bristles subtending the spikelets) (subfam-
ily Panicoideae, tribe Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Pohl 1951, 1962; Emery 1957a, 1957b; Rominger 1962; Crins 1991; Webster 1993.

1. Plants very large, usually 1.5–4 m tall; inflorescences very long and thick, 14–45(–50) cm long,
   1.5–3 cm in diam.; leaf blades 10–35 mm wide                                                               S. magna
1. Plants < 1.5 m tall; inflorescences often much smaller in length, diam. or both (can be large in S.
   italica, but plant is much smaller and spikelets larger); leaf blades up to 16(–21) mm broad, usu-
   ally narrower.
   2. Bristles (short) present at base of terminal spikelets only (sometimes below a few other
      spikelets); plants resembling a Panicum.
      3. Leaf blades 13–20 cm long, usually tapering to an extremely narrow base, often involute;
         spikelets usually (2.5–)3–4 mm long; bristles shorter to longer than spike lets (rarely > 6 mm
         long)                                                                                          S. reverchonii
      3. Leaf blades 5–13 cm long, not or only slightly narrowing toward base, flat; spikelets 2.5–3
         mm long; bristles usually shorter than the spikelets                                               S. ramiseta
   2. Bristles present on nearly all spikelets; plants not resembling a Panicum.
                                                                                            SETARIA/POACEAE 1319

    4. Bristles 1–3 below each spikelet; panicles variable in shape and length, the axis obscured or
       visible.
       5. Bristles antrorsely scabrous (with up-pointing barbs visible with lens, the free end of the
          barbs above or distal to the attached end).
          6. Plants annual; bristles on average > 1 per spiklet (1–3 below each spikelet); inflores-
             cences chunky and extremely dense in appearance (axis not visible or visible in only a
             very few places).
             7. Panicles not lobed or interrupted, usually green, usually 10(–15) cm or less long;
                spikelets ca. 1.8–2.6 mm long, falling entire; fertile lemma finely rugose                    S. viridis
             7. Panicles often lobed or interrupted, purple or yellow, often large and heavy, up to
                30 cm long; spikelets ca. (2.5–)3 mm long, the caryopsis (= fruit) deciduous from
                glumes and sterile lemma; fertile lemma smooth or nearly so                                   S. italica
          6. Plants perennial; bristles mostly 1(–2) below each spikelet; inflorescences usually elon-
             gate, not chunky, not extremely dense in appearance (thus much of axis visible).
             8. Leaf blades narrow, 2–8 mm wide; panicles usually cylindric, not tapered, usually
                6–15 cm long; bristles mostly 4–15 mm long                                                S. leucopila
           8. Leaf blades broad, (5–)9–20 mm wide; panicles usually strongly tapered from a wide
              base to a narrow apex, (7–)11–35 cm long; bristles (10–)15–35 mm long                        S. scheelei
       5. Bristles retrorsely scabrous (with down-pointing barbs visible with lens, the free end of
          the barbs below or proximal to the attached end)                                               S. verticillata
    4. Bristles 4–12 below each spikelet; panicles cylindric, 3–15 cm long, so dense that axis is
       obscured.
       9. Plants perennial with knotty rhizomes                                                          S. parviflora
       9. Plants annual with fibrous roots only                                                              S. pumila

Setaria italica (L.) P. Beauv., (of Italy), FOXTAIL-MILLET, ITALIAN-MILLET, GERMAN-MILLET,
HUNGARIAN-MILLET. Annual similar to but larger and coarser than S. viridis; leaf blades to 16(–
21) mm wide; panicles up to 30 cm long and to 3 cm thick; spikelets ca. (2.5–)3 mm long; bristles
to ca. 12 mm long. Denton (damp limestone soil), Grayson (planted for erosion control along
Hwy 82), and Tarrant cos., also Parker Co. (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); apparently now being
widely used to stabilize soil following highway construction; Hatch et al. (1990) cited vegeta-
tional areas 4, 7, and 8 (Fig. 2) for TX; Gould (1975b) said that S. italica does not persist in the
state. Jul–Aug. Related to and interfertile with its wild ancestor S. viridis; native of Eurasia; FOX-
TAIL-MILLET appears to be an old domesticate first brought into cultivation in e Asia; it is used as
a cereal grain and sometimes seen as birdseed (Mabberley 1987; Zohary & Hopf 1994). I

Setaria leucopila (Scribn. & Merr.) K. Schum., (white-haired). Tufted perennial 20–100 cm tall;
bristles mostly 4–15 mm long; fertile lemma finely rugose and with transverse wrinkles. Well-
drained soils, sometimes with abundant moisture; Bell Co.; mainly w 1/2 of TX. May–Nov.
Setaria magna Griseb., (large), GIANT BRISTLE GRASS, GIANT FOXTAIL GRASS. Coarse annual; culms
to 1–2 cm thick at base; panicles 14–45(–50) cm long and 1.5–3 cm in diam.; bristles 10–20 mm
long; spikelets 2–2.5 mm long; fertile lemma smooth and shiny; caryopsis deciduous from
glumes and sterile lemma. Wet sand; mainly coastal TX, disjunct w to Tarrant Co. (Trinity River
bottom, Fort Worth Nature Center). Oct. This is the largest Setaria species in North America.

Setaria parviflora (Poir.) Kerguelén, (small-flowered), KNOT-ROOT BRISTLE GRASS. Perennial 15–
150 cm tall, with knotty rhizomes; leaf sheaths slightly compressed, keeled; leaf blades pilose
near base; inflorescences dense and stiff; bristles yellowish, tawny, greenish, or purplish, 5–10
mm long; spikelets 2.1–3.0 mm long; fertile lemma rugose. Stream banks, disturbed sites;
throughout TX. May–Nov. [S. geniculata (Lam.) P. Beauv.]

Setaria pumila (Poir.) Roem. & Schult., (dwarf), YELLOW BRISTLE GRASS. Annual with fibrous
1320 POACEAE/SORGHASTRUM

roots, similar to S. parviflora, differing in its slightly larger spikelets and panicles with relatively
fewer spikelets per verticil; bristles yellow at maturity; spikelets 2.7–3.3 mm long. Disturbed
soils; nearly throughout TX. Jun–Sep. Native to Europe. [S. glauca of authors, not (L.) P. Beauv., S.
lutescens (Weigel) F.T. Hubbard] This species has long gone under the name S. glauca, but be-
cause of nomenclatural considerations, S. pumila is the appropriate binomial (Clayton & Renvoize
1982). Known to cause mechanical injury to the mouths of livestock; the bristles easily pen-
etrate flesh and remain there because of tiny upwardly directed barbs (Kingsbury 1964). I

Setaria ramiseta (Scribn.) Pilg., (branching bristles). Perennial similar to S. reverchonii, differing
by characters in the key, its occurrence in non-limy soils, and a more s distribution. Sandy
loam, dry uplands; s TX n to s parts of region 5 and 8 (Gould 1975b), also Callahan Co. (Correll
& Johnston 1970). Spring–Jun, occasionally later. [Panicum ramisetum Scribn.]

Setaria reverchonii (Vasey) Pilg., (for Julien Reverchon,1837–1905, a French-American immi-
grant to Dallas and important botanical collector of early TX), REVERCHON’S BRISTLE GRASS.
Tufted erect perennial 20–80 cm tall; culm bases hard, swollen; leaf sheaths pilose on margins
and at summit; leaf blades scabrous; ligule a short, membranous-based ring of hairs; fertile
lemma conspicuously rugose. Rock outcrops or gravelly soils on limestone; mainly Blackland
Prairie (Austin Chalk) s and w to w TX. Apr–Jun, Sep. [Panicum reverchonii Vasey]

Setaria scheelei (Steud.) Hitchc., (for Karl Wilhelm Scheele, 1742–1786, German chemist),
SOUTHWESTERN BRISTLE GRASS, SCHEELE’S BRISTLE GRASS. Coarse perennial 70–130 cm tall;
bristles (10–)15–35 mm long; spikelets 2.1–2.6 mm long; fertile lemma rugose. Fencerows, ra-
vines, open woods, often in shade; Bell and McLennan cos.; s part of nc TX s and w to w TX.
May–Nov.

Setaria verticillata (L.) P. Beauv., (whorled), HOOKED BRISTLE GRASS, BUR BRISTLE GRASS, FOXTAIL
GRASS. Annual; leaf sheath margins pilose; spikelets 2–2.3 mm long; fertile lemma finely rugu-
lose. Gould (1975b) reported McCart 9281 from Brown Co.; other TX specimens are from
Brewster, Dimmit and El Paso cos. Native to Europe. I

Setaria viridis (L.) P. Beauv., (green), GREEN BRISTLE GRASS, GREEN FOXTAIL GRASS. Annual up to
100 cm tall; leaf sheaths slightly compressed; leaf blades mostly 3–10 mm wide; inflorescences
rather soft and flexible; bristles usually green; spikelets 1.8–2.6 mm long; fertile lemma finely
rugose. Disturbed sites; Blackland Prairie s and w to w TX. May–Jul. Native of Eurasia. While
this species is often treated as having a number of varieties (e.g., Kartesz 1994; Jones et al. 1997),
we are following Gould (1975b) in not recognizing infraspecific taxa in nc TX. I

                                SORGHASTRUM INDIAN GRASS
Coarse perennials; leaf blades flat, often conspicuously bluish green; inflorescence a long ex-
serted panicle; spikelets in pairs, one sessile and fertile, one vestigial, in ours reduced to a hairy
pedicel; disarticulation so that associated pedicel and section of the inflorescence branch fall
with sessile spikelet; fertile spikelet 2-flowered, the upper, fertile lemma with a geniculate and
twisted awn.
AA genus of 17 species of Africa and tropical and warm areas of the Americas. (Named from
its resemblance to the genus Sorghum) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCE: Davila 1988.

1. Awns of lemmas mostly 23–35 mm long, usually twice-geniculate; spikelets at maturity usually
   dark brown                                                                                     S. elliottii
1. Awns of lemmas usually 12–17 mm long, once-geniculate; spikelets at maturity light brown
   or straw-colored                                                                               S. nutans
                                                              ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1321




Schizachyrium scoparium [USB]                              Sclerochloa dura [HI1]




      Secale cereale [HI1]         Setaria italica [USD]                            Setaria leucopila [GO1]




      Setaria magna [USB]       Setaria parviflora [HI1]                            Setaria pumila [RCA]
1322 POACEAE/SORGHUM

Sorghastrum elliottii (C. Mohr) Nash, (for Stephen Elliott, 1771–1830, Carolinian botanist), SLEN-
DER INDIAN GRASS, LONG-BRISTLED INDIAN GRASS. Not rhizomatous; culms usually 0.8–1.8 m tall;
ligules 1–4 mm long; panicles narrow, looser than in S. nutans, sparsely flowered, 15–30 cm long;
spikelets usually 5.5–7 mm long. Sandy wooded areas; Fannin Co. (Talbot property), also col-
lected by Reverchon in Dallas Co. in 1876, also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); mainly se and e TX. Sep–Nov.

Sorghastrum nutans (L.) Nash, (nodding), YELLOW INDIAN GRASS, INDIAN REED. State grass of
Oklahoma (S. Barber, pers. comm.). Rhizomes short, scaly; culms erect, up to 2.5 m tall; ligule a
stiff membrane 2–5 mm long; panicles loosely contracted, up to 30 cm long, yellowish; spikelets
usually 6–8 mm long. Moist areas, open woodlands, grasslands; throughout TX. Sep–Nov. One
of the dominants in the original tall grass prairie and considered one of the “big four” tall
grasses along with Andropogon gerardii, Panicum virgatum, and Schizachryium scoparium;
important forage grass and indicator of good range conditions. [S. avenaceum (Michx.) Nash]

                                                 SORGHUM
Robust annuals or perennials; ligule a ciliate membrane; inflorescence an open or contracted
panicle; spikelets in pairs, one sessile and perfect, the other pedicelled and staminate; disarticu-
lation below sessile spikelets so that associated pedicel and section of inflorescence branch fall
with spikelet; perfect spikelet 2-flowered, the upper fertile lemma usually awned or awnless.
AA mainly Old World genus of 24 species (Mexico, 1 species) including S. bicolor, the world’s
fourth most important cereal after WHEAT, CORN, and RICE; this species, which is more tolerant
of drought than most cereals, is of particular importance in Africa and Asia where it feeds mil-
lions of people (Heiser 1990a). Some Sorghum species, under certain conditions, can be fa-
tally poisonous to livestock due to the presence of hydrocyanic acid (Sperry et al. 1955). (deriva-
tion unclear, possibly from sorgho, the Italian name of the plant, or perhaps from Latin syricus,
Syria, and granum, grain, the presumed place of origin of S. halepense) (subfamily Panicoideae,
tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Snowden 1936; Celarier 1958; Duvall & Doebley 1990.

1. Plants perennial, with rhizomes.
   2. Plants usually 3–4 m tall; rhizomes short; spikelets 5–6.5 mm long; pedicellate spike-
      lets falling with a part of the pedicel; caryopses (= fruits) 3–3.8 mm long; possibly present
      in nc TX (no specimens seen)                                                                       S. almum
   2. Plants usually < 2 m tall; rhizome system extensive; spikelets 4.5–5.5 mm long; pedicellate
      spikelets disarticulating cleanly at the nodes; caryopses 2–3 mm long; extremely abundant
      in nc TX                                                                                        S. halepense
1. Plants annual, without rhizomes                                                                        S. bicolor

Sorghum almum Parodi, (nourishing). Rhizomatous perennial similar to S. halapense. Seeded in
pastures; included based on citation for vegetational area 5 by Hignight et al. (1988); also s TX
and Edwards Plateau. Summer–fall. Native to Argentina. Duvall and Doebley (1990) considered
this taxon to be a hybrid between S. halepense and a diploid from S. bicolor subsp.
arundinaceum (Desv.) de Wet & J.R. Harlan (subsp. arundinaceum is the wild relative of culti-
vated SORGHUM). Jones et al. (1997) treated this taxon as S. ⫻almum Parodi [S. bicolor ⫻ S.
halepense]. I

Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench, (two-colored). Large succulent annual ca. 0.8–2.5 m tall; leaf
blades 1–5 cm or more wide; inflorescences variable. Summer–fall. Probably native of Africa.
Poisonous in a manner similar to S. halepense (Hardin & Brownie 1993).  I

1. Panicles compact; lemma of perfect spikelets awnless                                             subsp. bicolor
1. Panicles open; lemma of perfect spikelets awned                                            subsp. drummondii
                                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1323




Setaria ramiseta [HI1]                              Setaria reverchonii [USB]                      Setaria scheelei [GO1]




  Setaria verticillata [MAS]                             Setaria viridis [RCA]                   Sorghastrum elliottii [HI1]




                         Sorghastrum nutans [HI1, RCA]                                          Sorghum almum [HEA]
1324 POACEAE/SPARTINA

subsp. bicolor. SORGHUM, MILO, SORGO, KAFIR, HEGARI, BROOM-CORN, GUINEA-CORN, KAOLANG.
Widely cultivated in TX; found as a transitory escape along roadsides, railroads, and field mar-
gins; Brown, Grayson, Montague, and Tarrant cos. [S. vulgare Pers.] Thought to have been
brought into cultivation in Sudan ca. 1000 BC.; cultivated for its grain, sweet juice, broom mate-
rial, silage, and as a forage plant; a staple in Africa, India, and China; it thrives under drier con-
ditions than appropriate for corn (Mabberley 1987). I

subsp. drummondii (Nees ex Steud.) de Wet & J.R. Harlan, (for its discoverer, Thomas
Drummond, 1780–1835, Scottish botanist and collector in North America). SUDAN GRASS. Awn
of lemma ca. 10 mm long. Cultivated and possibly escapes; included based on citation for veg-
etational area 5 by Hignight et al. (1988). [S. sudanese (Piper) Stapf] Jones et al. (1997) treated this
taxon as S. ⫻drummondii (Steud.) Millsp. & Chase [S. arundinaceum ⫻ S. bicolor]. While this
plant is valuable as forage, because of cyanide production at certain stages, caution is advised.
I
Sorghum halepense (L.) Pers., (of Aleppo or Haleb, a city in n Syria), JOHNSON GRASS. Coarse rhi-
zomatous perennial 25–200 cm tall; leaf sheaths glabrous; leaf blades pilose above at base;
ligule a membrane with fringe of hairs; panicles varying from narrow and dense to loose and
open, yellow-brown or red-brown to purple-brown; lemma awnless or with awn 1–1.5 mm long.
Fields, roadsides, disturbed areas; throughout TX. May–Nov. Native of the Mediterranean re-
gion; introduced into TX in the 1880s; now one the most abundant grasses in nc TX and a per-
nicious invader of native habitats. While normally edible, this species can be poisonous to live-
stock when young, during dry weather, or after a frost, drought, or period of high temperatures;
the poisonous principle is dhurrin, a cyanogenic glycoside (Pammel 1911; Burlage 1968; Hardin
& Brownie 1993).  I

                         SPARTINA CORD GRASS, MARSH GRASS
AA genus of 17 species primarily of coastal America, Europe, and n Africa; typically halo-
phytic (= tolerant of salty or alkaline conditions. (Greek: spartine, a cord, possibly from the ap-
pearance of the inflorescence branches) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCE: Mobberley 1956.

Spartina pectinata Link, (comb-like), PRAIRIE CORD GRASS, TALL MARSH GRASS, SLOUGH GRASS.
Rhizomatous perennial 1.5–2.5 m tall; ligule a ring of hairs 1–3 mm long; inflorescence branches
8–40, appressed, 4–15 cm long; spikelets 1-flowered, closely placed, sessile, 10–25 mm long in-
cluding scabrous awns of the glumes; anthers 4–6 mm long. Low moist areas, swales, fresh or
brackish water; Comanche, Grayson (Hagerman Nat. Wildlife Refuge), and Fannin cos.; also
Rockwall Co. (Wallace Prairie) (Mahler 1988); Blackland Prairie and Edwards Plateau w and n
to nw TX. Aug–Oct. Other Spartina species are important salt marsh grasses.

                    SPHENOPHOLIS WEDGE GRASS, WEDGESCALE
AA genus of 5 species ranging from Canada to Mexico. (Greek: sphen, a wedge, and pholis,
scale, referring to the shape of the broadly obovate or cuneate second glume) (subfamily
Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)
REFERENCE: Erdman 1965.

Sphenopholis obtusata (Michx.) Scribn., (obtuse, blunt), PRAIRIE WEDGESCALE. Annual 15–100
(–120) cm tall; similar in aspect to Koeleria but with second glume much more obovate and
more blunt at apex; culms single or tufted; leaf sheaths glabrous or pubescent; ligule a mem-
brane 1.5–3 mm long, glabrous or ciliate; inflorescence a narrow panicle, dense, spike-like; in-
florescence axis glabrous or minutely scabrous; spikelets shiny, 2–3-flowered, 1.5–5 mm long,
                                                                                ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1325




Sorghum bicolor subsp. drummondii [USD]            Sorghum halepense [RCA]                            Spartina pectinata [HI1]




     Sphenopholis obtusata [HI1]          Sporobolus compositus var. clandestinus [HI1]   Sporobolus compositus var. compositus [USB]




Sporobolus compositus var. drummondii [BB2]      Sporobolus compositus var. macer [HI1]           Sporobolus cryptandrus [USB]
1326 POACEAE/SPOROBOLUS

awnless, disarticulating below glumes; apex of second glume conspicuously obovate. Low, open
or partly shaded ground, clayey or sandy soils; throughout most of TX. Apr–Jun.

                                        SPOROBOLUS DROPSEED
Annuals or perennials; ligules minute, largely a ciliate fringe on vestigial membranous base;
inflorescences spike-like or open-panicled, often partly included within a sheath; spikelets 1-
flowered, awnless; glumes shorter than or equaling the lemma, 1-nerved; lemmas usually 1-
nerved; fruit falling free from lemma and palea, the seed coat not fused to the pericarp (there-
fore not a true caryopsis).
AA genus of 160 species in the Americas, Asia, Africa, and Europe; some have edible grains.
(Greek: sporos, seed, and ballein, to cast forth, referring to the deciduous grains) (subfamily
Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCES: Clayton 1965; Riggins 1977; Brown 1993; Wipff & Jones 1995; Peterson et al. 1997.

1. Panicles contracted, the branches appressed; plants annual or perennial.
   2. Plants with evident short, creeping, scaly rhizomes                                    S. compositus var. macer
   2. Plants without creeping, scaly rhizomes.
      3. Culms 1–2 m tall, (2–)3–7 mm in diam. at base; panicles mostly 25–70 cm long; spikelets
      2.6–3.2(–4) mm long; mainly far w TX and Panhandle (only Bosque Co. in nc TX)                         S. giganteus
      3. Culms 1.2 m or less tall, 1–3 mm in diam. at base (to 5 mm in S. asper which has spikelets 4–7
         mm long); panicles 1–30(–40) cm long; spikelet length various; widespread in nc TX.
         4. Plants annual; panicles usually 1–5 cm long.
            5. Florets glabrous.
               6. Glumes shorter than floret; lemmas 1-nerved; lower leaf sheaths not papillose-
                  pilose                                                                                    S. neglectus
               6. Glumes longer than floret; lemmas 3-nerved (midnerve more conspicuous); lower
                  leaf sheaths papillose-pilose                                                            S. ozarkanus
            5. Florets pubescent.
               7. Glumes as long as or longer than floret; lower leaf sheaths and blades papillose-
                  pilose; lemmas 3-nerved (midnerve more conspicuous)                                      S. ozarkanus
               7. Glumes shorter than floret; lower leaf sheaths and blades usually not papillose-pi-
                  lose; lemmas 1- or 3-nerved                                                            S. vaginiflorus
         4. Plants perennial; panicles usually 5–30 cm long.
            8. Spikelets 1.4–2 mm long; inflorescences mostly exerted from sheaths                              S. indicus
            8. Spikelets 4–7 mm long; inflorescences usually at least partly included within
               sheaths.
               9. Lemmas glabrous; panicles 5–30 cm long; pericarp gelatinous when wet.
                 10. Terminal sheaths 0.8–2(–2.5) mm wide when folded; culms 1–2(–2.5) mm wide
                      near base; primary panicle branches 8–18, not crowded           S. compositus var. drummondii
                 10. Terminal sheaths (1.3–)1.5–6 mm wide when folded; culms (1.4–)2–5 mm wide
                      near base; panicle branches 12–35, crowded                       S. compositus var. compositus
               9. Lemmas appressed-pubescent; panicles 5–10 cm long; pericarp loose when wet
                                                                                      S. compositus var. clandestinus
1. Panicles open, the branches ascending OR widely spreading; plants perennial.
   11. Pedicels 3–8(–12) mm long; spikelets 4–6(–7.2) mm long; known locally only from Lamar
        Co. in extreme ne portion of nc TX                                                                  S. silveanus
   11. Pedicels 0.2–ca. 2 mm long; spikelets 1.5–2.8 mm long; widespread in nc TX.
        12. Panicles 3–15(–18) cm long, exserted beyond sheath, the lower branches visibly whorled;
             sheath summit without collar of hairs; culms 10–30(–50) cm tall                            S. pyramidatus
        12. Panicles 15–30(–40) cm long, partially included within sheath, the branches not visibly
                                                                             SPOROBOLUS/POACEAE 1327

         whorled (often hidden within sheath); sheath summit with collar of hairs; culms 35–
         120 cm tall                                                                         S. cryptandrus

Sporobolus compositus (Poir.) Merr., (compound). Perennial; spikelets in contracted terminal
panicles, often with cleistogamous spikelets in axillary panicles; spikelets 4–7 mm long. [S.
asper (Michx.) Kunth] This species long went under the name S. asper, but because of nomen-
clatural considerations, S. compositus is the appropriate binomial (Kartesz & Gandhi 1995). Key
to varieties included in key to species.

var. clandestinus (Biehler) Wipff & S.D. Jones, (concealed), PURPLE-FLOWER DROPSEED. Spikelets
5–7 mm long. Grasslands, disturbed sites; widespread in e 1/2 of TX. Aug–Oct. [S. asper (Michx.)
Kunth var. clandestinus (Biehler) Shinners, S. clandestinus (Biehler) Hitchc.] We are following
Wipff and Jones (1995) for nomenclature of this taxon. While it has often been recognized at
the specific level (e.g., Kartesz 1994), because var. clandestinus differs morphologically from var.
compositus in only minor ways, Wipff and Jones (1995) argued that it is most appropriately rec-
ognized at the varietal level.

var. compositus. TALL DROPSEED, LONG-LEAF RUSH GRASS, ROUGH RUSH GRASS. Cespitose, without
rhizomes. Grasslands, disturbed sites; widespread in e 1/2 of TX. Sep–Nov.

var. drummondii (Trin.) Kartesz & Gandhi, (for its discoverer, Thomas Drummond, 1780–1835,
Scottish botanist and collector in North America), MEADOW DROPSEED. Cespitose, without rhi-
zomes. Grasslands, disturbed sites; widespread in e 1/2 of TX. Aug–Nov. Jones et al. (1997)
lumped this variety with var. compositus.

var. macer (Trin.) Shinners, (thin, meager), MISSISSIPPI DROPSEED. Similar to var. compositus. Open
woods, margins of woods; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et
al. (1990); mainly e TX. Aug–Nov.

Sporobolus cryptandrus (Torr.) A. Gray, (with hidden flowers), SAND DROPSEED, COVERED-SPIKE
DROPSEED. Perennial; summit of sheaths with tufts of long white hairs 2–4 mm long; panicles
15–30(–40) cm long, 2–12 cm wide, usually partially enclosed by the subtending sheath; lem-
mas as long as spikelet. Grasslands, disturbed sites; throughout TX except far e part. May–Nov.
The grains were consumed by Native Americans (Mabberley 1987).

Sporobolus giganteus Nash, (gigantic), GIANT DROPSEED. Large perennial. Loose sand; Bosque Co.
(Carr 1989) in Lampasas Cut Plain; mainly far w TX, Edwards Plateau, and Panhandle. Summer–fall.

Sporobolus indicus (L.) R. Br., (of India), SMUT GRASS. Perennial; spikelets 1.4–2 mm long; peri-
carp mucilaginous, the seed often sticking instead of falling readily. Moist soils, often in dis-
turbed areas; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990);
mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Mar–Dec. Native to Asia. I

Sporobolus neglectus Nash, (overlooked), PUFF-SHEATH DROPSEED. Annual; erect or decumbent;
terminal panicles contracted, 2–5 cm long, often only apical portion exserted from subtending
sheath; axillary panicles shorter, almost entirely enclosed by sheaths; sheaths somewhat in-
flated; spikelets (1.3–)1.6–2.8 mm long; lemmas white or purple-tinged, glabrous. Disturbed
sites; Bosque, Grayson, and Mills cos.; nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Nov. Jones et al. (1997)
treated this species as S. vaginiflorus var. neglectus (Nash) Scribn.

Sporobolus ozarkanus Fernald, (of the Ozarks), OZARK DROPSEED. Annual; culms 4–50 cm tall;
spikelets 2.3–3.8(–4.2) mm long. Limestone areas, roadsides; Grayson, Johnson, and Wise cos.,
also Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Aug–Oct. Jones
et al. (1997) lumped this species with S. neglectus (treated by them as S. vaginiflorus var.
neglectus).
1328 POACEAE/STENOTAPHRUM

Sporobolus pyramidatus (Lam.) Hitchc., (pyramidal), WHORLED DROPSEED. Perennial; panicles 3–
15(–18) cm long, becoming pyramidal and exserted at maturity, the lower branches whorled;
spikelets 1.5–2 mm long; lemmas 1.2–2 mm long. Open, disturbed sites; mainly Post Oak Savan-
nah s and w through most of TX. Mar–Nov.

Sporobolus silveanus Swallen, (for William Arents Silveus, 1875–1953, TX botanist and attor-
ney), SILVEUS’ DROPSEED. Perennial; culms 0.9–1.2 m tall; panicles somewhat open, 20–50 cm
long, 10–12(–15) cm wide; spikelets purple, 4–6(–7.2) mm long. Sandy soils, prairies and forest
openings; Lamar Co. (Tridens Prairie) in ne corner of nc TX; mainly se and e TX. Sep–Nov.

Sporobolus vaginiflorus (Torr. ex A. Gray) A.W. Wood, (with flowers in the sheaths), POVERTY
DROPSEED, SOUTHERN POVERTY GRASS. Annual; panicles terminal and axillary, contracted, 1–4
cm long, 2–5 mm wide, usually partially enclosed within subtending sheaths; lemmas often
mottled with dark purple, short appressed-pubescent. Disturbed sites, sandy or clay soils; wide-
spread in e 1/2 of TX. Sep–Nov.

                                            STENOTAPHRUM
AA genus of 7 species of tropical and warm areas of the world. (Greek: steno, narrow and
taphros, trench, from grooved inflorescence axis) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe
Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Sauer 1972; Crins 1991.

Stenotaphrum secundatum (Walter) Kuntze, (with parts arranged along one side), ST. AUGUSTINE
GRASS. Decumbent or ascending, stoloniferous, sod-forming perennial to ca. 30 cm tall; leaf
sheaths compressed, keeled, with a few hairs at summit; leaf blades cupped or creased length-
wise; ligule a very short ring of hairs; inflorescences spike-like, with wide, flattened, corky axis;
spikelets 4–5 mm long, awnless, 2-flowered, the lower floret staminate or neuter, the upper flo-
ret perfect, appressed and sunken into one side of the axis; first glume smaller than second.
Commonly planted as lawn-grass, escaping locally; tends to freeze back in very severe winters;
Grayson and Tarrant cos.; se and e TX w to nc TX and Edwards Plateau. Jun–Aug. Native to the
tropics (South America?), probably not native to the United States. I

                                                  TRIDENS
Tufted perennials with erect culms; ligule a ciliate membrane; panicles contracted or open;
spikelets 4–12-flowered; first glume 1-nerved; lemmas 3-nerved, glabrous or pubescent,
rounded on the back, obtuse or acute, usually ± 2-toothed or rounded-truncate at apex, the
nerves often slightly mucronate.
AA genus of 18 species of warm areas of the Americas (e. U.S. to Argentina) and one species in
Angola. Recognized as the genus Triodia by Hitchcock (1935). (Latin: tri, three, and dens, tooth,
from the 2-toothed lemma tip often with a mucro from between the teeth) (subfamily
Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCES: Tateoka 1961; Peterson et al. 1997.

1. Panicles open, ± loosely flowered, neither densely flowered nor spike-like, the panicle branches
   with conspicuous naked (= without spikelets) portions at base.
   2. Leaf blades mostly 3–10 mm wide; panicles mostly 15–35 cm long; plants 60–180 cm tall;
      spikelets 5–9 mm long                                                                            T. flavus
   2. Leaf blades mostly 1–3 mm wide; panicles mostly 5–16 cm long; plants 20–75 cm tall; spike
      lets usually 6–13 mm long                                                                       T. texanus
1. Panicles contracted, densely flowered or elongate and spike-like, the panicle branches without
                                                               ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1329




                                     Sporobolus indicus [REE]




                                                                                   Sporobolus neglectus [HI1]



     Sporobolus giganteus [HI1]



                                     Sporobolus ozarkanus [ROE]




Sporobolus pyramidatus [GO1]      Sporobolus silveanus [HI2]                     Sporobolus vaginiflorus [USB]
1330 POACEAE/TRIDENS

  conspicuous naked basal portions, usually with spikelets nearly to base or apparently so (branches
  usually tightly appressed at base).
  3. Glumes much longer than lemmas, usually as long as the entire spikelet or longer; plants
     50–170 cm tall                                                                                        T. strictus
  3. Glumes slightly longer to shorter than lemmas, much shorter than entire spikelet; plants 20–
     80(–90) cm tall.
     4. Lemmas glabrous or hairy only at extreme base; lemmas awnless                                   T. albescens
     4. Lemmas ciliate or puberulent to well above the base on nerves (at least lower third of lemma
        with pubescence on nerves); lemmas awnless or awned.
        5. Lemmas awnless; nerves usually with pubescence to well above middle                            T. muticus
        5. Lemmas short awned, the midnerve excurrent (= mucro); nerves with pubescence on
           lower 1/3–1/2 of lemma                                                                       T. congestus

Tridens albescens (Vasey) Wooton & Standl., (whitish), WHITE TRIDENS, WHITETOP. Plant 30–60
(–90) cm tall, glabrous; panicles 6–30 cm long; spikelets purplish-tinged, thus appearing banded.

Tridens congestus (L.H. Dewey) Nash, (congested, crowded together), PINK TRIDENS. Plant 30–75
cm tall, glabrous; panicles 5–10 cm long; glumes and lemmas thin, papery, usually pink-tinged;
lemma apex deeply cleft. Clay, disturbed sites, low moist areas; Grayson Co., also Dallas and
McLennan cos. (Mahler 1988); also se TX; endemic to TX. Apr–Nov. E

Tridens flavus (L.) Hitchc., (pale yellow), PURPLETOP, REDTOP. Plant 60–180 cm tall, glabrous;
lower leaf sheaths laterally compressed and keeled, often giving base of plant a flattish aspect;
panicles 15–35 cm or more long, drooping, the branches viscid, flexuous; spikelets green or pur-
plish. Old fields and woods; in much of TX. Aug–Nov.

Tridens muticus (Torr.) Nash, (pointless, cut off). Plant 20–80 cm tall; culm nodes often bearded;
panicles narrow, elongate, 7–20(–25) cm long; spikelets short-pedicelled, appearing sessile, not
densely crowded, purplish. Dry disturbed sites. Apr–Nov.

1. Second glume 3–7-nerved, usually 6–8 mm long; leaf blades usually 3–4 mm wide                       var. elongatus
1. Second glume 1-nerved, usually ca. 5 mm long or less; leaf blades usually 1–2 mm wide                 var. muticus

var. elongatus (Buckley) Shinners, (elongated), ROUGH TRIDENS. Dry disturbed sites; Bell, Denton,
Stephens, and Williamson cos.; in much of c and n TX.

var. muticus. SLIM TRIDENS. Dry disturbed sites; Bell Co.; in much of TX.

Tridens strictus (Nutt.) Nash, (erect), LONG-SPIKE TRIDENS. Plant 50–170 cm tall, glabrous;
panicles 10–36 cm long, the branches erect-appressed; glumes conspicuously longer than rest of
spikelet. Sandy or clayey soils, disturbed sites; Cooke, Dallas, Denton, Fannin, Grayson, Lamar, Lime-
stone, and McLennan cos.; se and e TX w to East Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Jul–Nov.

Tridens texanus (Wats.) Nash., (of Texas), TEXAS TRIDENS. Plant 20–75 cm tall; panicles mostly 5–
16 cm long, the branches flexuous, bare of spikelets basally; spikelets with 6–12 florets, usually
purple or rose-purple at maturity, conspicuous (superficially similar to Eragrostis secundiflora
subsp. oxylepis); lemmas pubescent on nerves below middle; glumes ca. 1/2 as long as lemmas.
Plains and dry slopes, often in protection of shrubs; Brown Co. (HPC) on sw margin of nc TX; s
and se TX n to Edwards Plateau and edge of nc TX. May–early Jun, late Aug–Nov.

                                                 TRIPLASIS
AA genus of 3 species occurring from the se United States to Costa Rica. (Greek: triplasios,
trifarious, threefold, from the tip of the lemma) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Eragrostideae)
REFERENCE: Peterson et al. 1997.
                                                                                 ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1331




  Stenotaphrum secundatum [USB]


                                                             Tridens albescens [USB]
                                                                                                   Tridens congestus [HI1]




                                   Tridens flavus [HI1]




Tridens muticus var. elongatus [USB]        Tridens muticus var. muticus [USB]                Tridens strictus [USB]
1332 POACEAE/TRIPLASIS

Triplasis purpurea (Walter) Chapm., (purple), PURPLE SAND GRASS. Tufted annual; culms 40–100
cm long, spreading-erect or decumbent at base, with 1-flowered cleistogamous spikelets in the
axils of enlarged sheaths; ligule a short, dense ring of hairs; panicles open, 3–11 cm long, with a
few sparingly rebranched primary branches; spikelets usually with 2–4 florets, 6–10 mm long,
usually purple; lemmas notched, mucronate or short awned due to the midnerve extending
from between the two lobes of the notch, silky pubescent on the 3 nerves. Sandy soils, forest
margins, stream banks, and open areas; Dallas, Grayson, Parker, Somervell, and Tarrant cos.;
throughout TX. (Jul–)Sep–Oct(–Nov).

                                         TRIPSACUM
AA New World genus of 13 species ranging from the s U.S. to Paraguay, especially Central
America. (Supposedly from Greek: tribein, to rub, perhaps in allusion to the polished spike-like
inflorescence) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Cutler & Anderson 1941; Larson & Doebley 1994.

Tripsacum dactyloides (L.) L., (finger-like), EASTERN GAMMA GRASS. Large, clump-forming, hard-
based, rhizomatous perennial 0.5–2(–3) m tall; leaf sheaths glabrous; leaf blades pilose above;
ligule a short, membranous-based ring of hairs; lower pistillate portion of inflorescence hard,
rounded, cylindrical, breaking up at the nodes into bead-like units, the spikelets 2-flowered, 6–
8 mm long, awnless, the upper floret perfect, the lower sterile, the glumes hardened and fused
with inflorescence axis and other spikelet parts; terminal portion of inflorescence staminate,
unbranched or with 2–3 branches, falling in age, with crowded, paired, unawned, 2-flowered
spikelets 6–10 mm long, the glumes papery. Prairies, depressions, or low areas; in nc TX mainly
Blackland Prairie w to Denton and Tarrant cos.; throughout TX, but more common in the e
part. Late Apr–Jun, less commonly to Oct.

                                          TRISETUM
AA temperate genus of ca. 70 species. (Latin: tres, three, and seta, a bristle, from the awned and
2-toothed lemma) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Aveneae)

Trisetum interruptum Buckley, (interrupted, not continuous), PRAIRIE TRISETUM. Annual 7–50(–
60) cm tall; leaf sheaths pubescent; ligule an asymmetrical, ragged-margined membrane 1.5–2
mm long; panicles narrow, spike-like; spikelets 2–3-flowered, 4–6 mm long (excluding awns);
lemmas with 2 slender apical teeth, awned from back at or just below base of the teeth, the
awns 5–8 mm long, twisted and geniculate. Disturbed sites; throughout most of TX. Apr–May.
Jones et al. (1997) treated this taxon in the genus Sphenopholis as S. interrupta (Buckley) Scribn.

                                     TRITICUM WHEAT
AA genus of 4 species ranging from the Mediterranean to Iran; it includes BREAD WHEAT, the
most important temperate cereal (representing ca. 90% of total world WHEAT production).
Worldwide, wheats (several species) rank first in grain production and account for more than
20% of total food calories consumed by humans. Wheats are also superior to many other grain
crops because of their high (8–14%) protein content (Zohary & Hopf 1994); they are particu-
larly important for bread-making because gluten, the characteristic protein, makes bread
dough stick together and gives it the ability to retain gas, thereby making it ideal for making
leavened (or risen) bread (Heiser 1990a). WHEAT is the most widely cultivated plant in the
world and is considered one of the first two cultivated plants (BARLEY—Hordeum vulgare, is the
other); as such it was probably important in the development of early civilization in the Near
East (Heiser 1990a). (The classical name for wheat) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Triticeae)
REFERENCES: Bowden 1959b; Gupta & Baum 1986, 1989; Zohary & Hopf 1994.
                                                                            ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1333




                                                                                              Triplasis purpurea [BB2]
                         Tridens texanus [HI2, USB]




Tripsacum dactyloides [HI1]                       Trisetum interruptum [USB]                 Triticum aestivum [HI1]




 Urochloa ciliatissima [GO4]                   Urochloa fasciculata [GO1]                       Urochloa platyphylla [USB]
1334 POACEAE/UROCHLOA

Triticum aestivum L., (summer), BREAD WHEAT, WHEAT. Glabrous annual 40–100 cm tall; leaf
blades prolonged at base into 2 narrow, thin, early-withering, pointed auricles on summit of leaf
sheath; ligule a membrane 2–3 mm long; spikelets sessile, solitary at each node, borne on oppo-
site sides of the zigzag spike axis; spikes unbranched, rather stiff, bilateral, terminal, 5–12 cm
long and ca. 1 cm thick; spikelets 2–5-flowered with only lower 2 or 3 perfect; glumes broadly
ovate, 3.6 mm or more wide, asymmetrical, awnless or awned, 3(–more)-nerved; lemmas broad,
slightly keeled, awnless or awned, the awn to 150 mm or more long. Commonly cultivated, in
nc TX chiefly in Blackland Prairie and Grand Prairie; frequently seen as a transitory escape
along highways, railroads, and waste places; throughout TX. Apr–May. Along with RICE and
CORN, WHEAT is one of the three most important food plants for humans worldwide. It is a
hexaploid (= 6 sets of chromosomes) species believed to have originated in sw Asia through hy-
bridization between the wild diploid Aegilops squarrosa L. and a tetraploid cultivated species,
Triticum turgidum L. (RIVET WHEAT) (Zohary & Hopf 1994). WHEAT is sometimes infected by
the rust fungus Puccinia graminis Pers. (black stem rust of wheat) which can cause significant
economic losses; this heterecious (= using more than 1 host to complete its life cycle) rust also
infects some species in the genus Berberis (e.g., the introduced B. vulgaris L.—EUROPEAN BAR-
BERRY); as a result, the sale or transport of certain BARBERRY species is illegal in the U.S. and
Canada. I

                                    UROCHLOA SIGNAL GRASS
Annual or perennial; often rooting at lower nodes; spikelets 2-flowered, the lower sterile or
staminate, the upper perfect; glumes usually both present, the first typically shorter; lower lem-
ma resembling second glume; upper (perfect) lemma hardened, glabrous, with inrolled margins.
AA genus of ca. 110 species (including most of Brachiaria) of tropical, subtropical, and warm
areas of the world. All nc TX species have previously been treated in the genus Brachiaria (e.g.,
Kartesz 1994); however, we are following Morrone and Zuloaga (1992) and Jones et al. (1997) in
treating them in Urochloa; Brachiaria (only ca. 1–3 species) is presently considered a small
originally Old World genus now more widely introduced (Morrone & Zuloaga 1992). Some
Urochloa species resemble either Panicum or Paspalum and at times have been placed in those
genera. (Presumably from Greek: uro, tail, and chloa, grass) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe
Paniceae)
REFERENCES: Webster 1988; Morrone & Zuloaga 1992; Wipff et al. 1993.

1. Spikelets conspicuously arranged on one side of a flattened winged inflorescence branch ca. 2
   mm wide; inflorescences of (2–)3–5(–6) widely spaced spike-like branches; plant superficially
   resembling a Paspalum                                                                          U. platyphylla
1. Spikelets not conspicuously arranged on one side of an inflorescence branch, the inflorescence
   branch neither flattened nor winged; inflorescence branches not widely spaced, sometimes main
   branches rebranched; plant superficially resembling a Panicum.
   2. First glume ca. 2/3–3/4 the spikelet length; spikelets 3–6 mm long; second glume densely
      long hairy or not so.
      3.     Spikelets 5–6 mm long; second glume with scattered hairs, not densely long hairy           U. texana
      3. Spikelets 3–4.5 mm long; second glume densely long hairy                                 U. ciliatissima
   2. First glume 1/4–1/3 the spikelet length; spikelets 2.4–3 mm long; second glume glabrous
                                                                                                  U. fasciculata

Urochloa ciliatissima (Buckley) R.D. Webster, (very fringed with hairs), FRINGED SIGNAL GRASS.
Perennial 10–50 cm tall; culms erect or usually decumbent below and rooting at nodes; ligules
short, of hairs, ca. 0.5 mm long; panicles few-flowered, with few, short, spreading or ascending
branches; first glume glabrous, ca. 3/4 as long as spikelet; upper glume densely long hairy; ster-
                                                                                     VULPIA/POACEAE 1335

ile lemma glabrous, except for pilose margins. Rocky or sandy open sites; Burnet, Erath,
McLennan, and Somervell cos.; throughout TX. May–Sep. [Brachiaria ciliatissima (Buckley)
Chase]

Urochloa fasciculata (Sw.) R.D. Webster, (clustered, growing in bundles), HURRAH GRASS,
BROWNTOP, BROWN-TOP SIGNAL GRASS, FIELD GRASS. Annual with spreading to erect, branching
culms 10–85 cm long, often rooting at lower nodes; ligules of hairs to ca. 1 mm long; panicles
with appressed or erect-spreading branches; spikelets globose-ovoid, with a small point at tip;
first glume 1/4–1/3 as long as spikelet; glumes and lower lemma glabrous. Dried-up pond or
stream margins, roadsides, disturbed sites; throughout most of TX. May–Oct. [Brachiaria
fasciculata (Sw.) Parodi, Panicum fasciculatum Sw. var. reticulatum (Torr.) Beal]

Urochloa platyphylla (Munro ex C. Wright) R.D. Webster, (broad-leaved), BROAD-LEAF SIGNAL
GRASS. Coarse annual with decumbent and spreading culm bases, often rooting at lower nodes;
inflorescence branches 2–6 cm long, widely spaced, winged; first glume 1/4–1/3 as long as
spikelet; glumes and lower lemma glabrous. Disturbed areas, roadsides, ditches; in much of the
e 1/2 of TX. Apr–Nov. [Brachiaria platyphylla (Munro ex C. Wright) Nash, Paspalum
platyphyllum Griseb, not Schult.]

Urochloa texana (Buckley) R.D. Webster, (of Texas), TEXAS PANICUM, TEXAS SIGNAL GRASS, TEXAS-
MILLET, COLORADO GRASS. Coarse annual, 40–120 cm tall, often creeping and rooting at lower
nodes; ligules of hairs to 1 mm long; panicles compact with erect-appressed branches; first
glume ca. 2/3 as long as spikelet, strongly 5–7 nerved; second glume and lower lemma with
scattered hairs. Moist, disturbed soils; throughout TX. May–Nov. [Brachiaria texana (Buckley)
S.T. Blake, Panicum texanum Buckley]

                                                VULPIA
          SIXWEEKS GRASS, SIXWEEKS FESCUE GRASS, ANNUAL FESCUE
Ours annuals; leaf blades 0.1–2.5 mm wide; leaf sheaths open, glabrous; ligule a short mem-
brane; inflorescence a usually contracted, ± 1-sided panicle or spicate raceme; spikelets with 3–
many florets; lemmas not toothed at apex, awned or awnless, the backs rounded, not plainly
nerved except at apex.
A A genus of 22 species found in temperate areas, especially the Mediterranean and w
America. Vulpia has been treated as part of the genus Festuca by some workers. (two possible
derivations: named for J.S. Vulpius, pharmacist-botanist of Baden, Germany; or vulpes, fox, from
the many long awns of the panicle) (subfamily Pooideae, tribe Poeae)
REFERENCES: Lonard & Gould 1974; Darbyshire & Warwick 1992.

1. Lower glume often very small, inconspicuous, 0.5–1.5 mm long, not more than 1/3 as long as
   upper; inflorescences often not completely exserted from sheath; lemma awns 7.5–22 mm
   long                                                                                           V. myuros
1. Lower glume 1.6–5 mm long, half as long as the upper or more; inflorescences usually well-
   exserted from sheath; lemma awns 0–12 mm long.
   2. Lemmas awnless or with awn shorter than lemma body; lemma awns 0–7 mm long; spikelets
      with 5–17 florets                                                                         V. octoflora
   2. Lemmas (except lowest) usually with awn longer than lemma body; lemma awns 3–12 mm
   long; spikelets with 3–7 florets.
      3. Lemma of lowermost floret 2.5–3.5 mm long; spikelets 3.5–5 mm long (excluding awns);
         first glume 1.3–2.5 mm long; caryopsis (=fruit) 1.5–2 mm long                             V. sciurea
      3. Lemma of lowermost floret 3.5–7.5 mm long; spikelets 5–10 mm long (excluding awns);
         first glume 3.5–5 mm long; caryopsis 3.5–5.5 mm long                                 V. bromoides
1336 POACEAE/WILLKOMMIA

Vulpia bromoides (L.) Gray, (like Bromus), BROME SIXWEEKS GRASS. Plant 5–50 cm tall; panicles 5–
15 cm long, well-exserted; second glume 4.5–7 mm long; lemmas glabrous or puberulent. Prai-
ries, disturbed habitats; Hunt Co. (Clymer Meadow), also Hamilton Co. (Stanford 1971); mainly
e TX. Spring. Native of Europe. [Festuca bromoides L., V. dertonensis (All.) Gola] I

Vulpia myuros (L.) C.C. Gmel., (mouse-tail), RAT-TAIL SIXWEEKS GRASS. Plant 15–70 cm tall;
panicles narrow, 3–25 cm long, usually only partially exserted from the sheath; spikelets with
3–7 florets; lemmas scabrous or ciliate, with awns 7.5–22 mm long. Disturbed areas, roadsides;
Bell and Hunt cos.; e TX w to e part of nc TX. Apr–May. Native of Europe. [Festuca myuros L.]
I

Vulpia octoflora (Walter) Rydb., (eight-flowered), COMMON SIXWEEKS GRASS. Plant 10–60 cm tall;
panicles rather dense, usually narrow, erect or with slightly drooping tip; lemmas glabrous or
pubescent. Disturbed sandy or sandy clay soils, limestone gravel, eroding clay; throughout TX.
Apr–May. This species is frequently seen growing on seed harvester ant mounds. Three varieties
separated by Gould (1975b) as follows occur in nc TX; however, they intergrade and are sepa-
rated with extreme difficulty.

1. Spikelets excluding awns usually 4.5–5 mm long; awn of lowermost floret 0.3–3 mm long     var. glauca
1. Spikelets excluding awns 5.5–10 mm long; awn of lowermost floret 2.5–6.5 mm long.
   2. Lemmas sparsely to densely pubescent                                                   var. hirtella
   2. Lemmas glabrous or slightly scabrous                                                 var. octoflora

var. glauca (Nutt.) Fernald, (whitened with a coating or bloom). Denton, Grayson,
Lamar, Navarro, and Somervell cos.; e TX w to Rolling Plains and s to Edwards Plateau. [Vulpia
octoflora var. tenella (Willd.) Fernald]

var. hirtella (Piper) Henrard, (somewhat hairy), HAIRY SIXWEEKS GRASS. McLennan and Palo
Pinto cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); nearly throughout TX.

var. octoflora, COMMON SIXWEEKS GRASS. Se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Pla-
teau. Apparently the most common variety in nc TX. [Festuca octoflora Walter]

Vulpia sciurea (Nutt.) Henrard, (squirrel), SQUIRREL SIXWEEKS GRASS, SIXWEEKS FESCUE. Plant 15–
60 cm tall; panicles narrow, elongate, drooping toward tip; second glume 2.5–4 mm long; lem-
mas pubescent. Loose sandy soils; Bell, Limestone, Parker, and Wise cos.; e TX w to West Cross
Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Apr–early May. [Festuca sciurea Nutt.]

                                            WILLKOMMIA
AA genus of 3 species of the tropics, s Africa, and s United States. (Named for Heinrich Moritz
Willkomm, 1821–1895, successively professor of botany at Tharandt, Dorpat, and Prague, and
student of Spanish flora) (subfamily Chloridoideae, tribe Cynodonteae)
REFERENCE: Hitchcock 1903.

Willkommia texana Hitchc., (of Texas), TEXAS WILLKOMMIA. Tufted perennial with culms 20–40
cm tall; leaves mostly basal; ligules minute, 0.6 mm or less long; inflorescence a very narrow
spike-like panicle 7–18 cm long, 3–10 mm broad, with spikelets in 2 rows along the short (ca. 2–
3 cm long) appressed branches; spikelets 1-flowered, sessile, awnless, 3.1–5 mm long, second
glume slightly longer than lemma. Bare clay soils; restricted to vegetational areas 1 and 2 ac-
cording to Gould (1975b) and 2 and 3 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); endemic to TX. However, the
description (Hitchcock 1903) indicated that the type is from Ennis (Ellis Co.) in the ec part of
nc TX. While we have not seen the type or other specimens from nc TX, the species is included
based on the type locality. E
                                                                        ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1337




                                           Urochloa texana [GO1, USB]




                                                                                        Vulpia octoflora var. octoflora [USB]
                                                  Vulpia myuros [USB]
Vulpia bromoides [USH]




                         Vulpia sciurea [USB]                             Willkommia texana [HI1]
1338 POACEAE/PONTERIACEAE

                                        ZEA MAIZE, CORN
AA Central American and Mexican genus of 4 species including MAIZE, one of the most im-
portant New World crops. (Old Greek name for some grass) (subfamily Panicoideae, tribe
Andropogoneae)
REFERENCES: Finan 1948; Iltis 1972, 1983, 1987; Doebley & Iltis 1980; Iltis & Doebley 1980;
Crosswhite 1982; Doebley 1990, 1996; Gaut & Doebley 1997.

Zea mays L., (from an aboriginal name), MAIZE, CORN. Large, coarse, monoecious annual to sev-
eral meters tall with succulent culms; leaves 2-ranked; leaf blades very broad, flat, with
auricled base; pistillate spikelets numerous in several rows on a much thickened axis (= cob),
the whole inflorescence covered by modified leaves or bracts (= shucks); elongated, unbranched
styles (= silk) extending from the inflorescence; staminate spikelets resembling those of
Tripsacum, in pairs on a terminal panicle (= tassle) with spike-like branches. Widely cultivated
and occassional as a transitory escape along roads, disturbed sites, or waste areas; Grayson Co.
(G. Diggs, pers. obs.); throughout TX. May–Jul, sporadically to Oct. MAIZE is derived from and
interfertile with a wild Mexican grass, TEOSINTE—Zea mexicana (Schrad.) Kuntze (TEOSINTE is
possibly more appropriately treated taxonomically as Z. mays L. subsp. mexicana (Schrad.)
H.H. Iltis). MAIZE has long been cultivated (since at least ca. 5,600 years ago) by Native Ameri-
cans from North to South America; but is thought to have originated in Mexico (Mabberley
1987; Heiser 1990a; Doebley 1990); it was very important in pre-Colombian Mesoamerica as
part of the maize/beans/squash agricultural system. Along with WHEAT and RICE, MAIZE is one
of the three most important food plants for humans worldwide; while world MAIZE production
is nearly as great as that for either WHEAT or RICE, a much higher percentage of MAIZE is used for
animal food (Chrispeels & Sadava 1977). Cultivars with hard endosperm that explodes when
heated are known as popcorns; other cultivars with colored grains were used ritually by Native
Americans. The common name MAIZE is derived from a Native American word, mahiz (Rupp
1987). The leaves of CORN sometimes have lesions caused by the rust fungus Puccinia sorghi
Schwein. (J. Hennen, pers. comm.). I

                                   ZIZANIOPSIS CUT GRASS
AA genus of 5 species of tropical and warm areas of the Americas. (Named from Zizania, and
Greek: opsi, sight or appearance, from resemblance to the genus Zizania) (subfamily
Oryzoideae, tribe Oryzeae)

Zizaniopsis miliacea (Michx.) Döll & Asch., (pertaining to millet, Milum), SOUTHERN WILD RICE,
MARSH-MILLET, GIANT CUT GRASS, WATER-MILLET. Coarse, largely glabrous, rhizomatous perennial
1.5–2.5(–3) m tall, forming beds in wet ground or shallow water; leaf blades to 1.2 m long and 35
mm wide, with scabrous, cutting margins; ligule a prominent membrane 6–20 mm long;
panicles large, 30–60 cm long, loose, with staminate and pistillate spikelets intermixed; spike-
lets 1-flowered, without glumes; lemma and palea similar to each other (resembling 2 glumes),
strongly ribbed; staminate lemma acuminate; pistillate lemma short-awned. Marshes, creek
bottoms, and lakeshores; se and e TX w to Dallas, Collin, Grayson, Hunt, Tarrant, and
Williamson cos., also Edwards Plateau. May–Sep.


                                   PONTEDERIACEAE
         WATER-HYACINTH OR PICKEREL-WEED FAMILY
Glabrous perennial herbs; leaves basal or alternate, simple, entire, often with or sometimes
without a distinct petiole; flowers solitary or in spikes, the inflorescence subtended by a spathe-
like bract; sepals 3, colored and petal-like; petals 3, one (the uppermost) differing slightly or greatly
                                                                                EICHHORNIA/PONTEDERACEAE 1339

in size, shape, or coloration; perianth parts united in lower part to form a very slender basal
tube; stamens 3 or 6; pistil 1; ovary superior; fruit a many-seeded capsule or a 1-seeded urticle.
AA small (32 species in 6 genera) family of freshwater aquatic herbs of tropical and warm ar-
eas, especially in the Americas, with a few in the n temperate zone. Some are problematic
weeds; a number are cultivated as ornamentals. (subclass Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: Rooted or free-floating, wet area or aquatic herbs; flowers of
ten conspicuous, the perianth petaloid; inflorescence a solitary flower or a spike, subtended by
a spathe-like bract.
REFERENCES: Dahlgren et al. 1985; Eckenwalder & Barrett 1986; Rosatti 1987.

1. Flowers numerous, in spikes; perianth funnelform; stamens 6.
   2. Perianth 4–6 cm long; petioles inflated; plants typically free-floating                                Eichhornia
   2. Perianth 1–2 cm long; petioles not inflated; plants typically rooted in mud                            Pontederia
1. Flowers solitary; perianth salverform; stamens 3                                                        Heteranthera


                                  EICHHORNIA WATER-HYACINTH
AA genus of 8 species of rhizomatous or floating aquatics; all native to the New World tropics
except 1 African species—Barrett 1988). (Named for Johann Albrecht Friedrich Eichhorn, 1779–
1856, of Berlin)
REFERENCE: Barrett 1988.

Eichhornia crassipes (Mart.) Solms, (with a thick stalk), COMMON WATER-HYACINTH. Normally
floating on surface of water; with abundant fibrous roots; leaf blades flat, ovate to rhombic or
reniform, shorter than the swollen, spongy-inflated petioles, the base broadly cuneate; inflores-
cence spicate or branched-spicate, well-exserted on a peduncle from a spathe; perianth slightly
2-lipped, with basal tube, the 6 segments free above, showy, bluish lavender, the upper petal
with yellow spot surrounded by blue at base; fruit a many-seeded dehiscent capsule. Some-
times cultivated; established as a wild plant in lakes, ponds, and slow streams; Dallas (Mahler
1988) and Denton (G. Dick, pers. comm.) cos., also escaping cultivation in Tarrant Co. (Fort
Worth Botanic Garden) (R. O’Kennon, pers. obs.); mainly s and e TX. Late Jun–Sep. Native of
Brazil. This species was apparently introduced into the U.S. at the 1884 Cotton States Exposi-
tion in New Orleans (Tveten & Tveten 1993); it is an aggressive and problematic weed in some
areas, such as Florida, where it can choke waterways; it has an extremely rapid growth rate and
is considered by some to be the world’s most serious aquatic weed. This species is considered a
“harmful or potentially harmful exotic plant” and it is illegal to release, import, sell, purchase,
propagate, or possess it in Texas (Harvey 1998). However, this species has the ability to remove
large amounts of inorganic pollutants dissolved in water (Woodland 1997) and in some parts of
the world is thus useful in wastewater cleanup efforts. I

                                  HETERANTHERA MUD-PLANTAIN
Herbs submersed or rooted in mud; leaves linear, ribbon- or grass-like, without a distinct blade
or with ovate to elliptic or elliptic-lanceolate blade; flowers solitary (our species), from a spathe;
perianth ± radially symmetrical; fruit a many-seeded capsule.
AA genus of 12 species of tropical and warm areas of Africa and in the Americas n to North
America. (Greek: hetera, different, and anthera, anther, from the dissimilar anthers of the first
described species)

1. Leaves sessile, linear, grass-like, pellucid; plants completely submersed except for flowers; flowers
   pale yellow; spathe sessile in axils of leaves                                                              H. dubia
1. Leaves petiolate, with an expanded, ovate to elliptic or elliptic-lanceolate, thickish blade; plants
1340 POTAMOGETONACEAE

  rooted in mud, forming rosettes and emersed or the leaves floating at the water surface; flowers
  light blue to purplish blue to white; spathe peduncled                                               H. limosa

Heteranthera dubia (Jacq.) MacMill., (dubious), GRASS-LEAF MUD-PLANTAIN, WATER STAR-GRASS.
Flowers usually exposed at or above the water surface; stamens all alike; anthers coiled with
age. Small streams and quiet waters; included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by
Hatch et al. (1990); mainly s and c TX. Apr–Jun.

Heteranthera limosa (Sw.) Willd., (of muddy places), BLUE MUD-PLANTAIN. Plant 6–25 cm tall,
tufted, becoming rhizomatous; leaves long-petioled; flowering stem with a terminal sheathing
spathe; upper petal with a pair of light yellow dots at base; stamens dimorphic, 2 with short
yellow anthers, the third with an elongate, light blue or yellow anther; anthers not coiled. Shal-
low water or wet places; Grayson Co., throughout much of TX but often inconspicuous and
rarely collected. Jun–Oct.

                                 PONTEDERIA PICKEREL-WEED
AA New World genus of 5 species. (Named for Guilio Pontedera, 1688–1756, professor at Padua)
REFERENCE: Lowden 1973.

Pontederia cordata L., (cordate, heart-shaped), PICKEREL-WEED, WAMPEE. Plant 40–80 cm tall,
from thick, short-rhizomatous base; leaves mostly basal, petioled, the petioles with long-clasp-
ing basal portion; leaf blades shorter than the petioles, narrowly ovate to triangular-lanceolate,
with rounded-truncate to deeply cordate base; inflorescence a slender terminal spike from a
spathe; perianth 2-lipped, violet-blue, the upper petal with a central yellow-green spot or pair
of spots; fruit a 1-seeded urticle. Margins of lakes, ponds, and streams; Dallas Co. (Mahler 1988),
mainly se and e TX, also Edwards Plateau. Jun–Oct. [P. cordata var. lancifolia (Muhl. ex Elliott)
Torr.] Sometimes cultivated as an ornamental; the fruit is said to be edible (Mabberley 1987).


              POTAMOGETONACEAE PONDWEED FAMILY
Aquatic rhizomatous herbs; leaves in ours alternate or closely crowded, all submerged or with
blades both submerged and floating, sessile or petioled; flowers perfect, in pedunculate axillary
spikes; perianth 4-merous; stamens 4; carpels 4, free, sessile; ovaries superior; fruits drupe-like,
1-seeded.
AA small (ca. 90 species in 3 genera—R. Haynes, pers. comm.) cosmopolitan family of peren-
nial, rooted aquatics. The third genus in the family is the monotypic, Old World genus
Groenlandia (with opposite leaves). Molecular analyses (Duvall et al. 1993) indicated a relation-
ship of the Potamogetonaceae with the Alismataceae. (subclass Alismatidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: aquatics with leaves all submerged or often both submerged
and floating—the floating ones ± elliptic and rather leathery with a waxy, water-repellent up-
per surface; flowers small, inconspicuous, 4-merous, in dense, pedunculate, axillary spikes not
subtended by bracts.
REFERENCES: Morong 1893; Taylor 1909a; Haynes 1978; Dahlgren et al. 1985; Larsen & Barker
1986.

1. Floating leaves present or absent; stipules free of the leaf base or adnate for < 4(–10) mm, often
   early deteriorating; submerged leaves translucent, flat, without grooves or channels, of variable
   width, sometimes less but often much wider than 1 mm (to 45 mm wide); including species
   widespread in nc TX                                                                                Potamogeton
1. Floating leaves absent; stipules adnate (= fused) to the leaf base for a distance of 10–30 mm, the
   free portion projecting as a ligule < half as long as the adnate portion; submerged leaves opaque,
   turgid, channeled, 0.2–1 mm wide; rare in nc TX                                                       Stuckenia
                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1341




                               Zea mays [FUC, HI1, USB]




Zizaniopsis miliacea [USB]                          Eichhornia crassipes [BT3, EN2]




Heteranthera dubia [REE]     Heteranthera limosa [CO1]                          Pontederia cordata [CO1]
1342 POTAMOGETONACEAE/POTAMOGETON

                                      POTAMOGETON PONDWEED
Leaves with blades both submerged (filiform to lanceolate, thin and flexuous) and floating (±
elliptic and rather leathery with a waxy upper surface) or all leaves submerged, sessile or peti-
oled; flowers in pedunculate axillary spikes, these usually held above the water.
AA cosmopolitan genus of ca. 90 species. PONDWEEDS are an important source of food for wa-
terfowl. Because Potamogeton species are aquatic and difficult to collect, and because identifica-
tion can be problematic, the group is neither well-collected nor well known. They are found in
lakes, ponds, streams, or other aquatic habitats. Some species of Potamogeton exhibit
hydrophily or water-mediated pollination (Cox 1988). (Ancient name from Greek: potamos,
river, and geiton, a neighbor, from the aquatic habitat)
REFERENCES: St. John 1916; Fernald 1932; Ogden 1943, 1966; Haynes 1968, 1974, 1986; Reznicek &
Bobbette 1976; Stuckey 1979; Catling & Dobson 1985; Haynes & Hellquist 1996.

1. Submerged leaves 2.5 mm or less wide, mostly 20 times or more longer than wide, linear; float-
   ing leaves if present with blades < 40 mm long.
   2. Small floating leaves with blades 5–40 mm long usually present; stipules adnate to the base
      of the submerged sessile leaf blades for mostly 1–4 mm; embryo coil plainly visible through
      the papery thin walls of the fruit                                                                 P. diversifolius
   2. Leaves all alike, submerged; stipules free of the submerged sessile leaf blades; fruit walls firm,
      the embryo coil obscured by the wall of the fruit.
      3. Fruits with an undulate to dentate, dorsal ridge or keel; stipules with evident veins appear-
         ing as ridges extending the length of the stipules                                                     P. foliosus
      3. Fruits dorsally smooth and rounded; stipules with veins usually not very evident                       P. pusillus
1. Submerged leaves either > 2.5 mm wide OR < 20 times longer than wide, linear-lanceolate to
   lanceolate, oblanceolate, oblong, or elliptic; floating leaves if present with blades usually > 40
   mm long.
   4. Leaves all submerged, sessile, weakly to strongly clasping at base; leaf margins finely toothed,
      often undulate-crisped                                                                                     P. crispus
   4. Leaves usually not all submerged, floating leaves commonly present by flowering time, occa-
      sionally absent; submerged leaves sessile or petiolate, not clasping the stem; leaf margins en-
      tire or nearly so, not undulate-crisped.
      5. Floating leaves with petioles 4–20 cm long, the petioles usually longer than blades; sub-
         merged leaves sessile or tapering to petioles up to 3.5 cm long (P. pulcher) or often much
         longer, (2–)3–13 cm (P. nodosus), acute to blunt-tipped, sometimes disintegrating by fruit-
         ing time (P. nodosus); widespread in nc TX.
         6. Floating leaf blades cuneate or rounded at base, with 9–21 veins; submerged leaves ta-
            pering gradually to a petiole (2–)3–13 cm long; mature fruits usually reddish; widespread
            in nc TX                                                                                          P. nodosus
         6. Floating leaf blades usually cordate, rarely rounded at base, with 21–29 (sometimes more)
            veins; submerged leaves tapering rather abruptly to a sessile base or short petiole (to 3.5
            cm long); mature fruits light-brown to olive-green; rare in nc TX                                   P. pulcher
      5. Floating leaves with petioles 2–9 cm long, the petioles usually shorter than blades; sub-
         merged leaves sessile or tapering to petioles up to 4 cm long, acute to abruptly acuminate
         or mucronate, usually persistent; rare in nc TX                                                    P. illinoensis

Potamogeton crispus L., (crimped), CURLY MUCKWEED. Leaves all submerged, sessile, with finely
toothed and ruffled margins, linear-oblong to linear-oblanceolate, oblong, or oblanceolate, 3–10
cm long, 3–15 mm wide. Scattered localities in TX including Dallas, Burnet, Travis, Hays, and
Wichita cos., also Grayson and Randall cos. (Ogden 1966). Jun. Native of Europe. I
                                                             STUCKENIA/POTAMOGETONACEAE 1343

Potamogeton diversifolius Raf., (diverse-leaved), WATER-THREAD PONDWEED. Submerged leaves
sessile, linear, 1–8 cm long, 0.3–1.5 mm wide; floating leaves sometimes absent, if present, the
blades 5–40 mm long, 5–20 mm wide, the petioles mostly 5–40 mm long. Denton Co., also Bur-
net, Henderson, Kaufman, Mills (Ogden 1966), and Lamar (Carr 1994) cos.; mainly se TX and
Trans-Pecos, scattered elsewhere. May–Sep.

Potamogeton foliosus Raf., (leafy), LEAFY PONDWEED. Leaves all submerged, sessile, linear, 1.3–8.2
cm long, 0.3–2.3 mm wide. Williamson Co. (Ogden 1966); s part of nc TX s and w to Edwards
Plateau and Trans-Pecos. May–Oct. [P. foliosus var. macellus Fernald]

Potamogeton illinoensis Morong, (of Illinois), SHINING PONDWEED, CORNSTALK PONDWEED,
ILLINOIS PONDWEED. Submerged leaves sessile or tapering to a petiole to 4 cm long, with blades
5–20 cm long, 10–45 mm wide, elliptic to oblong-elliptic, linear-lanceolate, or lanceolate; float-
ing leaves sometimes absent, if present, the blades 4–8(–19) cm long, 1–4(–7) cm wide. Bell, Bur-
net, Lampasas, and Williamson cos. in extreme s and sw parts of nc TX (Ogden 1966); mainly c
TX, Edwards Plateau, and Trans-Pecos. Apr–Jun.

Potamogeton nodosus Poir., (knotty), LONG-LEAF PONDWEED. Submerged leaves often disinte-
grated by flowering time or sometimes persistent, tapering to a petiole, with blades 10–20(–30)
cm long, 10–20(–35) mm wide, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate-elliptic; floating leaves with
blades 4–10(–13) cm long, (1.5–)2–3(–4.5) cm wide. Brown, Cooke, Dallas, Denton, Fannin,
Grayson, Hill, McLennan, Parker, and Tarrant cos.; nearly throughout TX. Apr–Jun. This is the
most common PONDWEED in nc TX.

Potamogeton pulcher Tuck., (handsome), HEART-LEAF PONDWEED. Submerged leaves sessile or ta-
pering to a short petiole, the blades oblong to lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, to 18 cm long and
35 mm wide (usually smaller), usually persistent, only rarely disintegrating by flowering time;
floating leaves with blades 4.5–9(–11) cm long, 2–5.5(–8.5) cm wide. Included based on citation
of vegetational areas 4 and 5 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990); mainly e TX. Apr–May.

Potamogeton pusillus L., (very small), BABY PONDWEED. Leaves all submerged, sessile, linear, 0.9–
6.5 cm long, 0.2–2.5 mm wide. Denton Co., also Dallas Co. (Ogden 1966); scattered mainly in e 1/
2 of TX. Late May–Jun.



                                         STUCKENIA
A ± cosmopolitan genus of 4 species previously treated as Potamogeton subgenus Coleogeton (R.
Haynes, pers. comm.); Haynes has further indicated that this segregate will be recognized in the
treatment of Potamogetonaceae for Flora of North America. (Derivation unknown, not given by
original author)
REFERENCES: St. John 1916; Ogden 1966; Haynes 1968, 1986; Larson & Barker 1986; Haynes & Les
1996.

Stuckenia pectinatus (L.) Börner, (comb-like), FENNELL-LEAF PONDWEED, SAGO PONDWEED, SAGO.
Rhizomatous, aquatic, perennial herb, often growing in large masses; rhizomes sometimes with
tuberous bulblets; stems ca. 1 mm in diam., much branched above, 0.3–1 m long; leaves all sub-
merged, alternate, sessile, filiform to narrowly linear, 3–12(–15) cm long, 0.2–1 mm wide, mar-
ginally entire; stipules fused with the leaf base for 10–30 mm and forming a sheath enfolding
the stem (leaf thus seemingly arising from apex of sheath), the free portion of the stipules less
than half as long as fused portion (i.e., adnate for 2/3 or more of their length); peduncles axil-
lary, 3–25 cm long, flexuous, the inflorescences thus submerged; inflorescence a capitate or cy-
lindrical, often interrupted spike with 2–5(–7) whorls of flowers, in fruit to 5 cm long; fruits
2.5–4 mm long, apiculate. Included based on citation of vegetational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et
1344 SMILACECEAE/SMILAX

al. (1990); widespread in TX. May–Oct. [Coleogeton pectinatus (L.) Les & R.R. Haynes,
Potamogeton pectinatus L.] The fruits and vegetative parts are important wildlife food (Correll
& Correll 1972).


                                            SMILACACEAE
                        GREENBRIER OR CATBRIER FAMILY
AA small (320 species in 3 genera) family of the tropics to temperate zones; it has often been
lumped into the Liliaceae or even combined with the Dioscoreaceae (Tyrl et al. 1994). (subclass
Liliidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: woody, prickly (painfully so) vines with tendrils and alter
nate, net-veined, ± leathery leaves; flowers (small, inconspicuous) and fruits (small berries)
inaxillary umbels.
REFERENCES: Dahlgren et al. 1985.

                                  SMILAX GREENBRIER, CATBRIER
Dioecious woody trailers or climbers from tough rhizomes or woody tubers; ± prickly; leaves al-
ternate, short-petioled, bearing tendrils from the petioles; leaf blades several-ribbed (main
veins) and net-veined, glabrous or nearly so; flowers in peduncled axillary umbels; perianth
green or yellow-green to bronze, small; sepals and petals each 3; stamens 6; pistil 1; ovary supe-
rior; fruit in nc TX species a 1–3-seeded blackish or blue-black berry ca. 4–9 mm long.
AA genus of ca. 300 species of tropical and temperate areas of the world. Most Smilax species
are easily recognized in the field as woody vines armed with prickles; they frequently make
moving through nc TX forests difficult or painful—hence the common names such as
BULLBRIER, HELLFETTER, and DEVIL GREENBRIER. The sarsaparilla of commerce is obtained from a
South American species; it was used medicinally as a tonic, for digestive disturbances, or in
treating rheumatism; the active substances are steroidal saponins (Dahlgren et al. 1985). Smilax
species are an important secondary food for white-tailed deer (Martin et al. 1951) (Ancient
Greek name of an evergreen oak)
REFERENCE: Coker 1944.

1. Lower surface of leaf blades glaucous (= whitened, silvery, or bluish gray); peduncles longer (usually
   much longer) than petioles of subtending leaves; stems neither with numerous weak bristle-like
   dark prickles (only stiff prickles are present) nor leaf blades with indented sides; fruits usually
   covered with a bloom (= coating of white wax or powder) and bluish, sometimes blackish; only
   on extreme e margin of nc TX                                                                                S. glauca
1. Lower surface of leaf blades ± the same green color as upper surface; peduncles longer or shorter
   than petioles of subtending leaves; often either stems with numerous, weak, bristle-like prickles
   OR leaf blades with indented sides; fruits black, rarely covered with a bloom; widespread in nc TX.
   2. Leaf bases cordate to truncate or rounded; peduncles (= stalk of inflorescence) 1.5 or more
      times as long as petioles of the subtending leaves, to 70 mm long; fruits usually 1-seeded;
      widespread in nc TX.
      3. Stems with relatively weak, somewhat bristle-like, usually dark prickles; leaf margins not
         thickened; leaves drying and fading to an ashy-green color; leaf blades of flowering branches
         ovate or rounded in outline, the sides ± curved outward, almost never indented, the base
         rounded to cordate                                                                               S. tamnoides
      3. Stems with rigid, broad-based, pale or only dark-tipped prickles; leaf margins often thick-
         ened (as if with a rib (= vein) forming the edge); leaves drying and fading to a tan color; leaf
         blades of flowering branches triangular to reniform (= kidney-shaped), the sides often in-
                                                                          ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1345




  Potamogeton crispus [REE]                  Potamogeton diversifolius [MAS]                   Potamogeton foliosus [MAS]




Potamogeton illinoensis [MAS]                      Potamogeton nodosus [LUN]                      Potamogeton pulcher [GWO]




                    Potamogeton pusillus [REE]                            Stuckenia pectinatus [MAS]
1346 SMILACECEAE/SMILAX

       dented to nearly straight or curved outward, the base nearly truncate to widely cordate
                                                                                                          S. bona-nox
  2. Leaf bases often cuneate (= wedge-shaped-triangular) or cordate to truncate or rounded;
     peduncles usually less than 1.5 times as long as petioles of the subtending leaves, to 15 mm
     long or if longer the stems without dark slender prickles and leaf blades without indented
     sides and thickened margins; fruits 1–3-seeded; rare in nc TX.
     4. Typical mature leaf blades lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, usually 2 times as long as wide
        or longer, basally cuneate; stems terete                                                              S. smallii
     4. Typical mature leaf blades ovate to nearly rounded, usually less than 1.5 times as long as
        wide, basally rounded to cordate; stems terete to 4-angled                                    S. rotundifolia

Smilax bona-nox L., (goodnight, from the Spanish: buenos noches, for the West Indian species
recorded by Clusius), SAW GREENBRIER, FIDDLE-LEAF GREENBRIER, STRETCHBERRY, CHINA-BRIER,
BULLBRIER, CATBRIER, ZARZAPARRILLA, TRAMP’S-TROUBLE, FRINGED GREENBRIER. Forming low
tangles or climbing on shrubs or trees; leaf blades varying greatly in size and shape; peduncles
to 30 mm long; fruits ellipsoid to subglobose, to 6 mm long and 3.5–5 mm wide. Open woods,
old fields, pastures, sandy or rocky soils; widespread in the e 1/2 of TX. Apr–May. This is one of
the two abundant nc TX GREEN-BRIERS.

Smilax glauca Walter, (whitened with a coating or bloom), SAWBRIER, CATBRIER, CAT GREENBRIER,
WILD SARSAPARILLA, GLAUCOUS-LEAF GREENBRIER, SOWBRIER, SARSAPARILLA-VINE. Freely climb-
ing; stems often glaucous, with scattered stiff slender prickles; leaf blades elliptic to ovate or
reniform, to 13 cm long and 10 cm wide, the bases rounded to subcordate; peduncles to 30(–38)
mm long, usually 1.5–3 times as long as the subtending petiole. Sandy thickets, woods, fields,
and along streams; Henderson, Lamar, and Milam cos.; se and e TX w to e margin of nc TX.
May–Jun. If the leaf glaucousness is lost, the terete (not 4-angled) stems and peduncles, often
much longer than the subtending petioles, can help distinguish this species from S.
rotundifolia, while the rounded to subcordate leaf bases can separate it from S. smallii.

Smilax rotundifolia L., (round-leaved), COMMON GREENBRIER, BULLBRIER, HORSEBRIER. High-
climbing and forming thickets; stems terete or 4-angled; peduncles usually to ca. 15 mm long,
usually a little shorter to a little longer than the petiole of the subtending leaf; fruits globose, 5–
8 mm in diam., usually 12 or less per cluster at maturity. Thickets and woods, moist to dry areas;
Bosque Co. (Carr 1989), also Fort Hood (Bell or Coryell cos.—Sanchez 1997); mainly se and e TX,
also Edwards Plateau.

Smilax smallii Morong, (for its discoverer, John Kunkel Small, 1869–1938, botanist at NY Bot.
Garden), SMALL’S GREENBRIER. Often high climbing; stems armed only below; leaf bases cuneate;
peduncles ca. 4–10 mm long; fruits ca. 6 mm in diam. Along creeks, woodlands; Milam and
Henderson cos. near e margin of nc TX, also a Reverchon collection from Dallas; mainly se and
e TX. May–Jun.

Smilax tamnoides L., (resembling Tamnus, a genus of Dioscoreaceae), CHINAROOT, HELLFETTER,
BRISTLE GREENBRIER, DEVIL GREENBRIER, HAGBRIER, WILD SARSPARILLA. Usually high-climbing;
peduncles 15–65 mm long; fruits to ca. 9 mm long. Stream bottom woods, sandy or less often
silty clay soils; se and e TX w to West Cross Timbers and Edwards Plateau. Apr. [S. hispida Muhl.
ex Torr.] This is one of the two abundant nc TX GREENBRIERS.

Smilax renifolia Small, (kidney-leaved), endemic to the Edwards Plateau, is reported from veg-
etational area 4 (Fig. 2) by Hatch et al. (1990). However, no definitive specimens have been seen
from nc TX. Field observations on the Edwards Plateau (R. O’Kennon) raise doubts about the
distinctiveness of S. renifolia from S. bona-nox. Also, Coker (1944), in a treatment of the woody
species of Smilax in the U.S., indicated that the type of S. renifolia is actually S. bona-nox. While
                                                         ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1347




                                                                                             乆     么
Smilax bona-nox [BT3]         Smilax glauca [G&F]                           Smilax smallii [JEM]




                                                               乆
                        么

                            Smilax rotundifolia [JEM]




                                Smilax tamnoides [JEM]
1348 TYPHACEAE/TYPHA

distinguishing S. renifolia by its reniform or deltiod-reniform, mostly broader than long leaf
blades (vs. typically panduriform to broadly ovate, usually longer than broad in S. bona-nox),
Correll and Johnston (1970) likewise indicated S. renifolia “… should probably be treated as a
geographic variant of S. bona-nox, its closest ally.” E


                              TYPHACEAE CAT-TAIL FAMILY
AA very small (10–12 species), cosmopolitan family represented by a single genus. (subclass
Commelinidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: large, wet area, perennial herbs with elongate, linear, spongy,
2-ranked leaves and dense, felty, brownish, cylindrical inflorescences divided into male and fe-
male portions.
REFERENCES: Wilson 1909; Dahlgren et al. 1985; Thieret & Luken 1996.

                                                TYPHA CAT-TAIL
Coarse, wet area perennial herbs to ca. 3 m tall, forming clumps of beds from rhizomes; stems
erect, simple, terete; leaves alternate, with closed, tubular sheath continuous with the grass-like
blade; flowers in a dense terminal spike, without perianth, imperfect; staminate flowers at sum-
mit of spike, consisting of a single stamen (falling early); pistillate flowers below, consisting of a
single persistent pistil on a pedicel bearing long hairs; ovary superior; the many crowded flow-
ers making a felty, brownish, cylindrical mass; fruit a minute, wind-dispersed nutlet.

ACAT-TAILS provide food and habitat for a variety of animals, but are often considered pests
because they spread rapidly and displace other species. Some are eaten by humans and the
leaves can be made into mats or other articles. (Named from typhe, the old Greek name)
REFERENCES: Hotchkiss & Dozier 1949; Smith 1967; Lee & Fairbrothers 1969; Lee 1975.

1. Staminate and pistillate portions of spike with a gap of 1–4 cm between them; leaves nearly flat
   to strongly convex (= outwardly curved) on back; stigmas thread-like, nonfleshy, deciduous
                                                                                                          T. domingensis
1. Staminate and pistillate portions of spike touching; leaves flat on back; stigmas lance ovoid, fleshy,
   persistent                                                                                                  T. latifolia

Typha domingensis Pers., (of Santo Domingo), NARROW-LEAF CAT-TAIL, SOUTHERN CAT-TAIL, TULE.
Plant 2–3 m tall; leaf blades 0.6–1.8 cm wide (fresh), 0.5–1.5 cm wide (dry), light yellowish green;
leaf sheath of uppermost leaves tapered to blade, not auricled, with brownish mucilage glands
on sheath only, not on inner surface of blade; bracts present on each pistillate flower; inflores-
cence as tall as or slightly overtopped by the leaves. Often very abundant in ditches, bogs, stock
tanks, and lake margins, in shallow water or wet ground; throughout most of TX. Apr–Jul. Dur-
ing pioneer days, the creeping rhizomes “… were eaten, the abundant pollen was mixed with
flour for the making of pancakes, and the young female inflorescences were boiled and eaten
like miniature roasting ears” (Crosswhite 1980).

Typha latifolia L., (broad-leaved), COMMON CAT-TAIL, BROAD-LEAF CAT-TAIL, TULE ESPADILLA. Plant
to ca. 3 m tall; leaf blades 1.0–2.3 cm wide (fresh), 0.6–1.6 cm wide (dry); bracts of pistillate flow-
ers absent or present on a few flowers. Ditches, bogs, stock tanks, and lake margins, in shallow
water or wet ground; throughout most of TX. Apr–Jun. These rhizomatous plants often spread
to form large stands.

Typha angustifolia L., (narrow-leaved), is cited for e TX to the e of nc TX (Hatch et al. 1990). It
supposedly differs from T. domingensis in being smaller (1–1.5 m tall), having dark green, nar-
rower leaves, 0.4–1.2 cm wide (fresh), 0.3–0.8 cm (dry), having leaf sheaths auricled, with
brownish mucilage glands extending above sheath onto the inner surface of the blade, and
                                                                                             XYRIS/XYRIDACEAE 1349

with inflorescences much overtopped by the leaves. Jones et al. (1997) lumped T. angustifolia
with T. domingensis; we have been unable to consistently separate the two species with confi-
dence. John Kartesz (pers. comm. 1997) indicated that T. angustifolia does not occur in TX.


               XYRIDACEAE YELLOW-EYED-GRASS FAMILY
AA small (260 species in 5 genera) family of mainly tropical and warm area herbs with a few
in temperate regions; they usually occur in wet habitats. (subclass Commelinidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: grass-like or rush-like, moist or wet area herbs with basal
leaves and long naked flowering stalks terminated by small, head-like or cone-like spikes with
conspicuous brownish bracts subtending the usually yellow flowers.
REFERENCES: Kral 1983; Dahlgren et al. 1985.

                                     XYRIS YELLOW-EYED-GRASS
Perennial, tufted or solitary, grass- or rush-like scapose herbs; leaves basal, linear to filiform;
flowering stalks (= scapes) terminated by a head-like or cone-like spike of spirally imbricated
brownish, woody bracts; flowers opening in morning, 1 per upper bract; lower bracts usually
sterile; sepals 3, dimorphic, the 2 lateral ones keeled and persistent, the outer one covering the
flower in bud and deciduous; petals 3, yellow (rarely whitish), composed of a broad blade and a
long, narrow claw hidden by the subtending bract, unfolding in the morning; stamens 3; stami-
nodia 3; ovary superior; fruit a dehiscent capsule.
AA genus of ca. 240 or more species of tropical and warm areas of the world. A number of
other species occur just to the e of nc TX and can be distinguished using the treatment by Kral
(1966a). (Greek: xyris, name of some plant with 2-edged leaves, from xyron, a razor)
REFERENCES: Blomquist 1955; Kral 1960b, 1966a; Bridges & Orzell 1987.

1. Leaves 3–20 mm wide, linear to broadly linear, flat in cross-section; spikes 5–30 mm long with
   bracts 5–8 mm long; petal blades 3–10 mm long; staminodia bearded with long hairs.
   2. Spikes usually 5–15 mm long, of rather loosely imbricated bracts, the tips of the bracts not
      appressed; petal blades ca. 3–4 mm long; keel of lateral sepals lacerate (look under bracts)              X. jupicai
   2. Spikes 10–30 mm long, of tightly imbricated bracts, the tips of the bracts closely appressed;
      petal blades ca. 8–10 mm long; keel of lateral sepals ciliate-scabrid                                   X. ambigua
1. Leaves < 3 mm wide, filiform to linear-filiform, terete, oval, or blocky in cross-section; spikes 4–7
   mm long with bracts 4.5 mm or less long; petal blades 3–4(–5) mm long; staminodia beardless
                                                                                                           X. baldwiniana

Xyris ambigua Beyr. ex Kunth, (ambiguous). Solitary or in small tufts; leaves 10–40 cm long, 3–
20 mm wide; base of inner leaves with very prominent dark longitudinal veins in sharp con-
trast to the white or pale intervening tissue; scapes (15–)70–100 cm long. Moist sandy areas,
bogs, ditches, lake shores, savannahs; c Henderson Co. near e margin of nc TX; mainly se and e
TX. May–Jul.

Xyris baldwiniana Schult., (for its discoverer, William Baldwin, 1779–1819, botanist and physi-
cian of Pennsylvania). Growing in large tufts; leaves 10–30 cm long; scapes 20–40(–50) cm long.
Moist sandy areas, bogs, ditches, savannahs; c Henderson Co. near e margin of nc TX; mainly e
TX. May–Jul. This is the only U.S. species with beardless staminodea.

Xyris jupicai Rich., (derivation unknown). Solitary or in small tufts; leaves 10–60 cm long, 3–10
mm wide; scapes 20–70(–90) cm long. Moist sandy areas, ditches, lakeshores; c Henderson and
Limestone cos., also Lamar Co. (Carr 1994); se and e TX w to e edge of nc TX. Jun–Aug. Kral
(1966a) considered this species to probably be adventive from Latin America.
1350 ZANNICHELLIACEAE/ZANNICHELLIA


                                ZANNICHELLIACEAE
                         HORNED-PONDWEED FAMILY
AA very small (ca. 12 species in 4 genera) but cosmopolitan family of submerged aquatic
herbs; it is one of relatively few families that exhibit hydrophily—water-mediated pollination;
in Zannichellia pollination actually occurs underwater (hypodydrophily) in contrast to some
cases of hydrophily in which pollination occurs at the water surface (epihydrophily; e.g.,
Vallisneria in the Hydrocharitaceae) (Philbrick 1991, 1993). The family was previously treated
by some authorities as part of the Potamogetonaceae or in the Zosteraceae (Tyrl et al. 1994).
(subclass Alismatidae)
FAMILY RECOGNITION IN THE FIELD: the single nc TX species is a submerged aquatic herb with
opposite or apparently whorled, entire, almost thread-like leaves and small, curved, stalked fruits.
REFERENCES: Morong 1893; Taylor 1909a; Tomlinson & Posluszny 1976; Dahlgren et al. 1985;
Haynes & Holm-Nielsen 1987.

                         ZANNICHELLIA HORNED-PONDWEED
AA cosmopolitan genus of 1–5 species; pollination occurs underwater. (Named for Gian
Girolamo Zannichelli, a Venetian botanist, 1662–1729)
REFERENCE: Reese 1967.
Zannichellia palustris L., (marsh-loving), COMMON POOLMAT, HORNED-PONDWEED. Monoecious,
submerged, aquatic herb; stems much-branched; leaves opposite but sometimes appearing
whorled, very narrow, ca. 0.5 mm wide, to 10 cm long, entire, not sheathing basally; stipules
sheathing, membraneous, to 4 mm long; inflorescences axillary, usually 2-flowered (1 flower
staminate and 1 pistillate, the 2 together appearing as a single flower); perianth absent; stami-
nate flower of only a single stamen; pistillate flower of (2–)4(–8) carpels; ovaries superior; fruits
pedicellate nutlets 2–4 mm long including the beak (= persistent style), oblong, curved, ridged
or dentate on back. In water of lakes or streams; McLennan Co., also Denton Co. (G. Dick, pers.
comm.); widely scattered in TX. Apr–Jul. The foliage and fruits are important foods for water-
fowl (Kaul 1986e).
                                                  ILLUSTRATED FLORA OF NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS 1351




                                                                       Xris ambigua [SID]




                          Typha latifolia [REE]


Typha domingensis [BT3]




                                                                     Xyris baldwiniana [SID]




  Xyris jupicai [SID]       Zannichellia palustris [MAS]
